it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit www .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures . 
these articles discuss what to expect when a loved one dies , as well as practical steps you can take to cope with your grief . 
i had plenty of support from friends , and i kept myself busy .  but for a full year , i felt as if i were torn in half .  my emotions would rise and fall , twist and turn .  even now , almost three years since her death , deep emotional pain occasionally strikes , and often without warning .  have you lost a loved one in death .  if so , you may relate to kostas '  expressions .  few things cause more stress or heartache than the death of a mate , relative , or dear friend .  experts who study the agony caused by grief agree with that .  an article published in the american journal of psychiatry states that  death is the most obviously permanent and extreme form of loss .  faced with the unbearable pain such a loss brings , one who grieves may wonder   how long will these feelings last .  will i ever be happy again .  how can i find relief .   '  answers to those questions are considered in this issue of awake .  the next article will discuss what you might anticipate if you have recently been bereaved .  the subsequent articles will explore ways that may help you to lower the intensity of your grief .  we sincerely hope that what follows will be of comfort and practical help to anyone experiencing the agony of grief . 
help for those who grieve although some experts talk about grief occurring in set stages , each individual grieves in his or her own unique way .  do the differences in reactions to grief mean that some people are less saddened by their loss or are  suppressing  their feelings .  not necessarily .  while acknowledging and expressing grief can have a healing effect , there is not one  right way  to grieve .  much may depend on an individual ' s culture , personality , and life experiences , as well as the nature of the loss .  bereaved ones may not know what to expect following the death of a loved one .  however , certain emotions and challenges are common and can often be anticipated .  consider the following  feeling emotionally overwhelmed .  crying spells , yearning for the deceased , and abrupt mood changes may be experienced .  emotions may be further charged by vivid memories and dreams .  initially , though , the primary reaction may be shock and disbelief .  tiina recalls her response when her husband , timo , passed away unexpectedly .  she says   initially i was numb .  i couldn ' t even cry at first .  i was so overwhelmed that at times i found it difficult to breathe .  i just couldn ' t believe what had happened .  bouts of anxiety , anger , and guilt are also common .  this surprised us , since we had never before thought of ourselves as angry people .  we felt guilty too , as we questioned whether we could have done more to help our son .  alejandro , whose wife died after a prolonged illness , also experienced feelings of guilt   at first i felt that if god was allowing me to suffer this much , i must be a bad person .  then i felt guilty , as if i were blaming god for what happened .  and kostas , quoted in the preceding article , says   a few times i even felt angry at sophia for dying .  then i felt guilty for feeling that way .  after all , it was not her fault .  troublesome thinking patterns .  there may be periods during which one ' s thoughts become erratic or illogical .  for instance , a bereaved person may imagine that the deceased one can be heard , felt , or seen .  or the bereaved one may find it difficult to concentrate or to remember things .  tiina says   sometimes i ' d be having a conversation , but i ' d find that my mind wasn ' t there .  it was racing , going over the events surrounding timo ' s death .  the inability to focus was of itself distressing .  a desire to withdraw .  a grieving person may feel irritable or awkward in the presence of others .  says kostas   in the company of couples , i felt like a fifth wheel .  but i also felt out of place with single people .  ivan ' s wife , yolanda , remembers   it was so difficult to be around people who complained about problems that seemed trivial compared to ours .  then , too , there were those who would tell us how well their children were doing .  i was happy for them , yet at the same time , i found it hard to listen to them .  my husband and i understood that life goes on , but we simply didn ' t have the desire or patience to deal with it .  health problems .  changes in appetite , weight , and sleep patterns are common .  aaron recalls the year following the death of his father   i definitely had trouble sleeping .  i would wake up at the same time every night thinking about my father ' s death .  alejandro recalls having mysterious health problems   several times i was examined by a doctor and was assured that i was healthy .  i suspected that grief was causing my physical symptoms .  those symptoms eventually disappeared .  even so , alejandro ' s decision to see a doctor was wise .  grieving can lower the immune system , aggravate an existing health problem , or even cause a new one .  difficulty handling essential tasks .  recalls ivan   after eric ' s death we had to notify not only relatives and friends but also several others , such as his employer and his landlord .  there were also numerous legal documents to fill out .  then we had to go through eric ' s personal items .  all of this required focus at a time when we were fatigued mentally , physically , and emotionally .  for some , however , the real challenge comes later , when they need to handle matters that were previously handled by their loved one .  that was tiina ' s experience .  she explains   timo had always cared for our banking and other business matters .  now this became my responsibility , which only added to my already heightened levels of stress .  could i really handle all of this without making a mess .  the above - mentioned challenges  emotional , mental , and physical  may paint a daunting picture of grief .  the reality is that the pain following the loss of a loved one can be intense , but knowing this in advance may help recently bereaved ones to cope .  remember , too , not everyone experiences all of grief ' s potential effects .  furthermore , there may be some comfort for bereaved ones in knowing that the intense feelings associated with grief are normal .  what to expect  the intensity of grief does not last forever  it eventually subsides .  this is not to say that one fully  recovers  or forgets his or her loved one .  however , little by little , sharp pangs of grief soften .  they may resurface when certain memories arise unexpectedly or at certain times such as anniversaries .  but eventually , most people come to a point of emotional balance and can focus once again on life ' s daily activities .  this is especially so when the bereaved person has the support of family members or friends and takes reasonable steps to cope .  how long will it take .  for some , the worst may be over in a matter of months .  for many , a year or two may pass before they notice themselves feeling better .  and some need even more time .  for me ,  recalls alejandro ,  deep grieving continued for about three years .  be patient with yourself .  take one day at a time , move at your own pace , and know that the pangs of grief do not last forever .  that said , are there things you can do to ease your grief now and even prevent your grief from being unnecessarily prolonged .  the intense feelings associated with grief are normal   par .  such ones may need and benefit from professional mental - health assistance . 
help for those who grieve if you look for advice on dealing with grief , you will likely find a myriad of ideas  some more helpful than others .  perhaps that is because , as mentioned earlier , everyone grieves differently .  what works for one person may not work for someone else .  even so , there are some basic guidelines that have proved practical for many .  they are frequently cited by grief counselors , and they echo timeless principles found in an ancient book of wisdom , the bible .  some experts consider this to be the most important factor in getting through grief .  yet , at times , you may want to be alone .  you may even feel irritated at those who are trying to help you .  this is normal .  do not feel that you must always be around others , but do not completely push them away either .  after all , you may need their support in the future .  kindly let others know what you need at the moment and what you do not .  according to your needs , find a balance between time with other people and time alone .  principle   two are better than one .  for if one of them falls , the other can help his partner up .  a balanced diet will help with the stress that comes from dealing with grief .  try to eat a variety of fruits , vegetables , and lean proteins .  drink plenty of water and other healthful liquids .  if your appetite is low , eat small portions more frequently .  you may also ask your doctor about nutrition supplements .  brisk walks and other forms of exercise can lessen negative emotions .  exercise can provide time to reflect on your loss or to take a break from thinking about it .  principle   no one has ever hated his own body but he feeds it and takes care of it .  sleep is always important , but this is especially so for those who are grieving , as grief can bring extra fatigue .  be careful with the amount of caffeine and alcohol you consume , as both can interfere with your sleep .  principle   better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  recognize that everyone grieves differently .  ultimately , you will need to determine the strategy that works best for you .  many find that expressing their grief to others helps them deal with it , while others prefer not to express their grief .  experts have various opinions as to whether expressing one ' s feelings is vital to success in coping with grief .  if you need to confide in someone but are hesitant to do so , you might find it easier to start small by expressing some of your feelings to a close friend .  some people find that crying helps them deal with their grief , while others seem to cope even though they cry less .  principle   each heart knows its own bitterness .  some bereaved ones try to ease their emotional pain through the misuse of alcohol or drugs .  such  escape  is self - destructive .  any relief a person may feel is short - lived , only to be followed by major negative consequences .  try harmless ways to calm your anxieties .  principle   let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement .  many find it helpful to alternate periods of grieving   with temporary breaks .  you may find temporary relief by forming or strengthening friendships , learning new skills , or engaging in recreation .  as time passes , the balance will likely change .  you may notice that your breaks from grieving become longer and more frequent  a natural part of the healing process .  principle   there is an appointed time for everything , .  a time to weep and a time to laugh  a time to wail and a time to dance .  as soon as possible , resume a normal routine .  when you hold to a routine for sleep , work , and other activities , you will likely regain a sense of normalcy .  keeping yourself occupied with positive activities can help to mitigate painful emotions .  principle   he will hardly notice the passing days of his life , because the true god keeps him preoccupied with the rejoicing of his heart .  many who make big decisions soon after losing a loved one later regret those decisions .  if possible , wait for a reasonable length of time before moving , changing jobs , or discarding your loved one ' s belongings .  principle   the plans of the diligent surely lead to success , but all who are hasty surely head for poverty .  many bereaved ones feel it is beneficial to do things that help keep alive their memory of the person who has died .  you might find it therapeutic to collect pictures or mementos or to create a journal of events and stories you wish to recall .  store items that trigger pleasant memories and look through them later , when you feel ready .  principle   remember the days of old .  you might consider taking a vacation .  if a lengthy vacation is not practical , perhaps you can do something enjoyable for just a day or two , such as hiking , visiting a museum , or taking a drive .  even a brief change of pace can help you cope with your grief .  principle   come , you yourselves , privately into an isolated place and rest up a little .  remember that any time you can spend being of help to others can help you feel better .  you might start by helping others who have been affected by the loss of your loved one , such as friends or relatives who may need a grieving companion .  supporting and comforting others can give you renewed joy and a sense of purpose that may seem to be lacking .  principle   there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving .  grief can provide new insights into what truly matters .  take advantage of the opportunity to evaluate how you are using your life .  as needed , make adjustments in your priorities .  principle   better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting , for that is the end of every man , and the living should take it to heart .  realistically , nothing will completely erase the pain you feel .  however , many who have lost a loved one can attest that taking positive steps , such as those listed in this article , helped them to find comfort .  of course , this is not a comprehensive list of every possible way to alleviate grief .  but if you try some of these suggestions , you may find that they will bring you a welcome measure of relief .  does not endorse any particular health treatment .  two are better than one because they have a good reward  for their hard work .  but what will happen to the one who falls with no one to help him up .  or  greater benefit .  for no man ever hated his own body , but he feeds and cherishes it , just as the christ does the congregation ,      better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  the heart knows its own bitterness ,  and no outsider can share in its joy .  or  the bitterness of its soul .  therefore , since we have these promises , beloved ones , let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit , perfecting holiness in the fear of god .  there is an appointed time for everything , a time for every activity under the heavens       a time to weep and a time to laugh  a time to wail and a time to dance    lit .   ,  leap  skip about .  for he will hardly notice  the passing days of his life , because the true god keeps him preoccupied with the rejoicing of his heart .  or  remember .  the plans of the diligent surely lead to success ,  but all who are hasty surely head for poverty .  or  advantage .  remember the days of old  consider the years of past generations .  ask your father , and he can tell you  your elders , and they will inform you .  and he said to them   come , you yourselves , privately into an isolated place and rest up a little .  for there were many coming and going , and they had no leisure time even to eat a meal .  i have shown you in all things that by working hard in this way , you must assist those who are weak and must keep in mind the words of the lord jesus , when he himself said   there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving .   '        better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting , for that is the end of every man , and the living should take it to heart . 
help for those who grieve the pain of losing a loved one in death has been the subject of much research in recent times .  yet , as demonstrated previously , the best expert advice often harmonizes with the ancient wisdom found in the bible .  this speaks well of the timelessness of the bible ' s guidance .  the bible , however , contains more than dependable advice .  it provides information found nowhere else , which can bring immeasurable comfort to those who grieve .  their  thoughts perish .  consistent with this , the bible likens death to peaceful sleep .  expressing our feelings in prayer to god is more than good therapy or a means of organizing our thoughts .  it actually helps us to establish a personal relationship with our creator , who can use his power to comfort us .  a better future to look forward to imagine a time in the future when those in the grave will be brought back to life here on earth .  the bible repeatedly speaks of such a time .  describing what conditions on earth will then be like , the bible states that god  will wipe out every tear from  our  eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  many who believe in jehovah , the god of the bible , are significantly empowered to cope with grief by embracing the hope of seeing their dead loved ones again .  these thoughts come to the surface whenever i think of my loss , and as a result , i am actually able to cope with the worst thing that has ever happened to me .  tiina , mentioned earlier in this series of articles , says   since the day timo died , i have felt god ' s support .  i have strongly felt jehovah ' s helping hand in my time of distress .  and the bible ' s promise of a resurrection is very real to me .  it strengthens me to keep going until the day when i will see timo again .  these sentiments echo those of millions of people who are convinced of the bible ' s reliability .  even if you feel that the bible ' s claims are unreal or just a dream , you owe it to yourself to investigate the evidence that its counsel and promises are sound .  you just might find the bible to be the best help for those who grieve .  watch related videos on our website , jw .  org the bible promises a future when we will welcome back loved ones who have died what is the condition of the dead .  what happens to us when we die .  the bible ' s clear answer is comforting and reassuring look under library   videos   would you like good news .  with so much bad news , where can you find good news .  look under bible teachings   peace   happiness   par .  for the living know  that they will die , but the dead know nothing at all , nor do they have any more reward ,  because all memory of them is forgotten .  or  are conscious .  his spirit  goes out , he returns to the ground  on that very day his thoughts perish .  after he said these things , he added   laz a rus our friend has fallen asleep , but i am traveling there to awaken him .  the eyes of jehovah are on the righteous , and his ears listen to their cry for help .  with that i heard a loud voice from the throne say   look .  the tent of god is with mankind , and he will reside with them , and they will be his people .  and god himself will be with them .  the former things have passed away . 
help for those who grieve  the agony of grief what is it like to experience grief .  why do those who grieve need comfort .  what to expect this article examines misconceptions about grief , as well as some of the common reactions experienced during grief .  if you are grieving , note the wide range of feelings that are quite normal .  coping with grief  what you can do today what practical steps can you take to deal with your grief .  this article provides specific suggestions that have helped others and that are based on timeless wisdom .  the best help for those who grieve consider a source of comfort that many have turned to in their darkest hours , and see what help it may bring to you . 
