it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit donate .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures . 
the problem  this generation enjoys unprecedented technological , scientific and financial resources .  and yet this is perhaps the first generation to take the world to the brink of a  political , economic , and environmental  systems breakdown .  why are many informed people concerned about our future and that of the earth .  consider just some of the challenges facing us .  cybercrime   increasingly the internet is proving to be a dangerous place to visit .  it is a haven for pedophiles , bullies , trolls and hackers ,  says the newspaper the australian .  identity theft is one of the fastest - growing crimes in the world .  the internet provides another outlet for one of the worst traits of humankind  the capacity to be vicious and cruel .  financial inequality  according to a recent oxfam international report , the eight richest people own the same amount of wealth as the poorer half of humanity .  our broken economies ,  said oxfam ,  are funnelling wealth to a rich elite at the expense of the poorest in society , the majority of whom are women .  some fear that the growing inequality might trigger social unrest .  also , insect numbers are in steep decline in some lands .  because insects pollinate plants , scientists are now warning of a potential  ecological armageddon .  coral reefs are in trouble too .  are we able to make the changes needed for a safer and more secure world .  some feel that education should be part of the answer .  if so , what kind of education .  the following articles will consider these questions . 
a cure must do more than address symptoms  it must correct underlying causes the challenge do you believe that mankind can solve the many problems that rob us of peace and security and that threaten our future .  to be effective , any cure must surely address the root causes of our troubles , not just the symptoms .  to illustrate , a patient named tom was sick and later died .  why did he die .  when his first symptoms appeared , no one thought to search for their underlying cause ,  wrote the doctor whose hospital received tom shortly before he died .  it seems that tom ' s earlier caregivers had simply given him medication to make him feel better .  are humans taking a similar approach to the world ' s ills .  for example , in fighting crime , governments enact laws , install video surveillance , and strengthen police forces .  but these measures , while effective to some extent , do not address underlying causes .  after all , behavior usually reflects attitudes , beliefs , and desires .  daniel , who lives in a south american country that has a failing economy , says   we once had normal lives .  we did not dread armed robbery .  but now there no longer exists a peaceful town or village .  the failing economy has revealed what many people are really like  greedy and lacking in respect for the life or property of others .  a man whom we will call elias fled from a conflict in the middle east and later studied the bible .  he states   many young men from my home city were encouraged by their families and the political - religious system to get involved in the war and be considered heroes .  those on the opposing side were told the very same thing .  all of this made me see how sad it is to put faith in human rulers .  an ancient book of wisdom rightly states     the inclination of the heart of man is bad from his youth up .  the heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate .  who can know it .  out of the heart come wicked reasonings , murders , .  sexual immorality , thefts , false testimonies .  mankind has been unable to find a cure for the hurtful traits that lurk within us .  in fact , those traits appear to be getting worse , as reflected in the problems mentioned in the preceding article .  and this is so despite the vast amount of information that is available today , not to mention our unprecedented ability to communicate with others .  so why can we not make the world peaceful and safe .  are we asking more of ourselves than we can give .  are we trying to do the impossible .  even if by some miracle we could cure mankind ' s hurtful traits , we would still be unable to make the world safe and secure for all .  our human limitations .  the simple truth is this   it does not belong to man .  even to direct his step .  yes , we were not created to govern ourselves .  in fact , we were no more created to rule over our fellow humans than we were created to live under water or in outer space .  we were no more created to rule over our fellow humans than we were created to live under water consider this  do people in general like to have their equals tell them how to live or which moral values to live by .  do people like others to dictate how they should view such things as abortion or capital punishment or how they should discipline their children .  these are just some of the issues that divide people .  so , humbling though it might be , what the bible says makes sense .  we simply do not have the ability or the moral authority to rule over our fellow humans .  where , then , can we turn for help .  the most reasonable answer is for us to turn to our creator .  after all , he made us .  and contrary to what some may think , he has not forgotten us .  in fact , his concern for us is revealed in the wisdom found in the bible .  when we understand that unique book , we also understand ourselves better .  and we can make sense of mankind ' s sad history .  we can see why , as a german philosopher once wrote ,  peoples and governments never have learned anything from history , or acted on principles deduced from it .  a wise man once said that  wisdom is proved righteous by all its children ,  or results .  that sound advice can protect us from false hopes and unrealistic expectations .  kenneth , who lives in a north american city plagued with violence , says   one politician after another promises to make things better , but they cannot .  their failures are a regular reminder of bible wisdom .  daniel , quoted earlier , writes   every day convinces me more that humans cannot govern well .  trusting in your bank account or in some pension scheme is no guarantee of a good retirement .  i have seen people suffer terrible frustration in this regard .  the bible does even more than protect us from unrealistic expectations .  it also gives us hope , as we will go on to see .  the wisdom in the bible helps us to make sense of mankind ' s failures and tragic history     and jehovah began to smell a pleasing  aroma .  so jehovah said in his heart   never again will i curse  the ground on man ' s account , for the inclination of the heart of man is bad from his youth up  and never again will i strike down every living thing as i have done .  or  appeasing  soothing .  or  call down evil upon .  the heart is more treacherous  than anything else and is desperate .  who can know it .  or  deceitful .  or possibly ,  incurable .  for example , out of the heart come wicked reasonings  murders , adulteries , sexual immorality , thefts , false testimonies , blasphemies .  but know this , that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here .  i well know , o jehovah , that man ' s way does not belong to him .  it does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step .  all the same , wisdom is proved righteous  by all its children .  or  is vindicated .  for your own sakes , quit trusting in mere man , who is only the breath in his nostrils .  why should he be taken into account .  or  whose breath is in his nostrils . 
parents teach their children love by example a step toward meeting the challenge while on a school trip , some teenage boys were accused of sexually assaulting another male student .  all attended a prestigious private school in canada .  after the incident , leonard stern wrote in the ottawa citizen newspaper   all the advantages of intellect and education and social class do not inoculate young people against making bad moral decisions .  stern also stated   you ' d think the single greatest goal of parenting would be the promotion of a child ' s moral development .  the reality is that many parents seem more concerned about academic or material advancement .  to be sure , schooling is important .  but even the best secular education cannot help a person to combat wrong desires or bad inclinations .  where , then , can we get an education that addresses those areas  that provides moral guidance .  the bible is like a mirror .  when we look into it , we see our limitations and weaknesses more clearly .  but the bible does even more .  it helps us to make needed changes , to develop qualities that foster true peace and harmony .  those qualities include goodness , kindness , patience , self - control , and love .  love is even called  a perfect bond of union .  why is love so special .  note what the bible says about this quality .  love is patient and kind .  love is not jealous .  it does not brag , does not get puffed up  with pride  , does not behave indecently , does not look for its own interests , does not become provoked .  it does not keep account of the injury .  it does not rejoice over unrighteousness  badness  , but rejoices with the truth .  it bears all things , .  endures all things .  love never fails .  love does not work evil to one ' s neighbor .  above all things , have intense love for one another , because love covers a multitude of sins .  when you are with people who love you , how do you feel .  yes , you know that they want the best for you , that they would never intentionally hurt you .  love can also move people to make sacrifices , even lifestyle changes , for the benefit of others .  for example , when a man we will call george became a grandfather , he dearly wanted to spend time with his grandson .  but there was a problem .  george smoked heavily , and his son - in - law did not want him smoking around the baby .  what did george do .  yes , what power love has .  the bible helps us to cultivate many fine qualities , such as goodness , kindness , and especially love love is a quality that we learn .  parents play a big role in teaching their children how to love .  they feed and protect their children and come to their aid when they are hurt or sick .  good parents talk with their children and teach them .  they also discipline their children , which includes teaching them sound principles of right and wrong .  additionally , good parents set a fine example , becoming role models for their children .  sadly , though , some parents fail in their responsibilities .  does this mean that their children are doomed to failure .  even many older people , including some who grew up in dysfunctional families , have made amazing changes in their lives , becoming caring and trustworthy citizens .  as we will see in the following article , that even includes some who may have been viewed by others as beyond reform .  the bible can provide what secular education cannot  trustworthy moral and spiritual guidance the bible frankly acknowledges that some people will simply refuse to change for the better .  does that reality doom our prospects for lasting peace and safety .  if the future were just in human hands , our prospects would be grim indeed .  but as we will see , that is not the case .  in fact , the opposite is true  our future can be very bright .  for if anyone is a hearer of the word and not a doer , this one is like a man looking at his own face  in a mirror .  or  his natural face .  but besides all these things , clothe yourselves with love , for it is a perfect bond of union .  love is patient and kind .  love is not jealous .  it does not keep account of the injury .  but if there are gifts of prophecy , they will be done away with  if there are tongues , they will cease  if there is knowledge , it will be done away with .  love does not work evil to one ' s neighbor  therefore , love is the law ' s fulfillment .  above all things , have intense love for one another , because love covers a multitude of sins .  many will cleanse themselves and whiten themselves and will be refined .  and the wicked ones will act wickedly , and none of the wicked will understand  but those having insight will understand . 
they faced the challenge education based on the bible has amazing power to improve lives .  consider two examples of this  ricardo and andres .  my new friends had a big influence on me .  in fact , it became my goal to spend ten years in prison .  that may sound foolish .  but in my neighborhood , those who had spent time in prison were admired and respected .  and i wanted to be like them .  i experienced all that is associated with gang life , including drugs , sex , and violence .  one night i was involved in a shoot - out .  i thought i was going to be killed , but i escaped unharmed .  after that , i began to think more seriously about my life and my goals , and i decided that i wanted to change .  where could i find help .  most of my relatives were unhappy .  their lives were full of problems .  but that was not the case with the family of one of my uncles .  i knew that they were good people , and i knew that they lived by bible principles .  in fact , i had once learned from them that god ' s name is jehovah .  so not long after the shoot - out , i prayed to jehovah , addressing him by name and asking him to help me .  to my astonishment , the very next day , one of jehovah ' s witnesses knocked on my door .  he became my bible teacher .  i soon faced a big challenge .  my old friends often phoned , asking me to hang out with them .  though it was not easy , i said no .  i was determined to continue my bible study , and i am glad that i did .  my life improved dramatically , and i found true happiness .  i remember telling god in prayer that i had once been willing to spend ten years in prison to earn respect as a gang member .  so i asked him to allow me to serve him for at least ten years as a full - time minister in order to help others just as i had been helped .  and i might add , i never went to prison .  many of my former friends , however , are serving long prison sentences .  others are dead .  looking back , i am most grateful to my witness relatives .  they were willing to be different , to live by the bible .  i grew to respect them more than i ever respected anyone in the gang .  above all , i am thankful to god for teaching me the very best way to live .  andres  i was born and raised in a poor neighborhood where drugs , extortion , murder , and prostitution were common .  my father was an alcoholic and a cocaine addict .  he and my mother were always fighting , verbally and physically .  at an early age , i began drinking alcohol and using drugs .  i spent most of my time on the streets , stealing and then selling what i stole .  as i got older , my father , in a misguided attempt to draw close to me , taught me how to smuggle drugs and other illegal products into the country and sell them .  i made a lot of money  fast .  then one day the police came to my home .  they arrested me , and i was sentenced to five years in prison for attempted murder .  one morning an announcement over the prison loudspeaker invited inmates to a bible discussion held by jehovah ' s witnesses .  i decided to attend .  what i heard made sense , so i began to study the bible with the witnesses .  they did not water down the scriptures but showed me god ' s high moral standards .  i soon realized that i could not make the needed changes without help , especially when i received threats from fellow inmates who did not like what i was doing .  so i prayed for strength and wisdom , and jehovah helped me .  in fact , i was even able to go on the offensive , as it were , by speaking to other prisoners about the bible .  when my release came , i was so nervous that i actually wanted to stay in prison longer .  as i was leaving , a number of inmates waved goodbye .  some even said affectionately ,  go home , little shepherd .  it scares me to think about how my life might have turned out had i not allowed god to educate me .  i am very , very thankful that god loves me and did not consider me a lost cause .  more examples that illustrate the bible ' s power to transform lives are found on jw .  go to library , and search for the article series  the bible changes lives .  when a person is humble and honest , recognizes that he has to make changes , and wants to do so , the bible can help him .  it has an excellent track record . 
a government that will meet the challenge the united nations is promoting the concept of  global citizenship .  goals include encouraging international cooperation , respecting human rights , and protecting our planet .  as expressed by maher nasser in the un chronicle ,  climate change , organized crime , rising inequalities , unresolved conflicts , mass displacement of people , global terrorism , infectious diseases , and similar threats do not recognize .  others have gone even further , advocating a world government .  they include the italian philosopher , poet , and statesman dante   and the physicist albert einstein .  dante believed that peace could not last in a politically divided world .  a  kingdom divided against itself comes to ruin ,  he said , quoting jesus christ .  shortly after world war ii , which saw the use of two atomic bombs , albert einstein wrote an open letter to the general assembly of the united nations .  the united nations ,  he said ,  must act with utmost speed to create the necessary conditions for international security by laying the foundations for a real world government .  but could the politicians who would make up such a powerful government be immune to corruption , incompetence , and oppression .  or would they be just as prone to those dark traits as others have been .  these questions call to mind the words of british historian lord acton , who said   power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely .  even so , if the human family is to enjoy true peace and harmony , we have to be united .  but how can that goal be achieved .  is it even realistic .  the bible ' s answer is yes .  it can and will be achieved .  not by a world government made up of corruptible politicians .  rather , it will be by a government of god ' s making .  what is more , that government will express his right to rule over his creation .  what is that government .  the bible even gives it a name   the kingdom of god ,  or god ' s kingdom .  jesus christ had god ' s kingdom in mind when he said in his model prayer   let your kingdom come .  let your will take place .  yes , god ' s kingdom will ensure that god ' s will is done on earth , not the will of power - hungry or selfish humans .  god ' s kingdom is also called  the kingdom of the heavens .  while it will rule over the earth , it will not rule from the earth but will rule from heaven .  think what that means .  this world government will not require material or financial support .  what a relief that will be for its human subjects .  as the term  kingdom  suggests , god ' s kingdom is a royal government .  it has a king  jesus christ  who received his authority from god .  concerning jesus , the bible says     the government shall be upon his shoulder .  of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end .  to him there were given rulership , honor , and a kingdom , that the peoples , nations , and language groups should all serve him .  his rulership .  will not pass away .  the kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our lord  god  and of his christ .  in fulfillment of jesus '  model prayer , god ' s kingdom will fully accomplish god ' s will on earth .  under it , all mankind will learn how to care for the planet so that it will be healthy again and teem with life .  above all , god ' s kingdom will educate its subjects .  all will be taught the same standards .  there will be no discord or division .  they will not cause any harm or any ruin .  earth ' s inhabitants will truly be what the united nations would like people to be  peace - loving global citizens .  in time , words like  crime ,   pollution ,   poverty ,  and  war  will disappear from our vocabulary .  but when will this happen .  yes , when will god ' s kingdom take charge .  how will it do so .  and how can you benefit from its rule .  let us now see .  god ' s kingdom is a world government created by god .  its subjects will not be separated by political borders but will be fully united and at peace dante believed that peace could not last in a politically divided world einstein called upon the united nations to  create the necessary conditions for international security by laying the foundations for a real world government      knowing their thinking , he said to them   every kingdom divided against itself comes to ruin , and a house divided against itself falls .  but he said to them   i must also declare the good news of the kingdom of god to other cities , because for this i was sent .  you must pray , then , this way    our father in the heavens , let your name be sanctified .  let your will take place , as in heaven , also on earth .  happy are those conscious of their spiritual need , since the kingdom of the heavens belongs to them .  for a child has been born to us , a son has been given to us  and the rulership  will rest on his shoulder .  his name will be called wonderful counselor , mighty god , eternal father , prince of peace .  the zeal of jehovah of armies will do this .  or  government  princely rule .  or  government  princely rule .  and to him there were given rulership , honor , and a kingdom , that the peoples , nations , and language groups should all serve him .  his rulership is an everlasting rulership that will not pass away , and his kingdom will not be destroyed .  the seventh angel blew his trumpet .  and there were loud voices in heaven , saying   the kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our lord and of his christ , and he will rule as king forever and ever .  they will not cause any harm or any ruin in all my holy mountain , because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of jehovah as the waters cover the sea .  but the meek will possess the earth , and they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace . 
how the challenge will be fully overcome soon the long - awaited kingdom of god  a world government set up by god  will bring global peace and harmony to the earth .  but when will the kingdom take charge .  how will it do so .  and how can you benefit from kingdom rule .  the bible foretold a number of striking events that would signal that god ' s kingdom is coming soon .  those events make up a composite  sign  that includes international warfare , famine , disease , many earthquakes , and an increase in lawlessness .  another prophecy states   in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here .  for men will be lovers of themselves , lovers of money , .  disobedient to parents , unthankful , disloyal , having no natural affection , not open to any agreement , slanderers , without self - control , fierce , without love of goodness , .  puffed up with pride , lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of god .  traits such as these have always been manifest to some extent .  but now they are commonplace .  indeed , historians , statesmen , and writers have commented on how the world changed after that year .  from a bright epoch of progress , .  we entered an age of disaster , horror , and hatred , with insecurity everywhere .  on the positive side , those conditions are like a storm before the calm .  they show that kingdom rule over all the earth is near .  in fact , jesus included this positive element in his sign of the end   this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations , and then the end will come .  that good news is a central theme of the message of jehovah ' s witnesses .  indeed , their leading journal is entitled the watchtower announcing jehovah ' s kingdom .  it regularly discusses the wonderful things that god ' s kingdom will do for mankind and the earth .  the answer involves these four important facts              the kingdom will not operate through or be represented by the political leaders of the present world .  the world ' s political leaders , in an attempt to cling to power , will foolishly defy rule by god ' s kingdom .  god ' s kingdom will need to destroy the political kingdoms that want to continue dominating mankind .  this final global conflict is called armageddon .  all who willingly submit to god ' s kingdom will be preserved through armageddon into a peaceful new world .  they will make up what the bible calls  a great crowd ,  likely numbering into the millions .  when jesus was on earth , he gave us a preview of what he will do as king of god ' s kingdom .  he healed the sick and the disabled .  he fed many thousands .  he even controlled the natural elements .  above all , jesus taught people how to live together in peace and harmony .  all who humbly apply his teachings develop personality traits that will enable them to live happily under his kingdom forever .  no other educator can accomplish that .  why not read it .  the words themselves are simple .  but the message is profound and truly touches the heart .  a first step to becoming a subject of god ' s kingdom is education .  indeed , jesus said in prayer to god   this means everlasting life , their coming to know you , the only true god , and the one whom you sent , jesus christ .  when people come to know jehovah god as a person , they benefit in many ways .  consider just two  first , they develop strong faith in him .  that faith , which is based on evidence , convinces them that god ' s kingdom is a reality and that its rule is near .  second , they grow in love for god and for neighbor .  love for god impels them to obey him with a willing heart .  love for neighbor moves them to apply jesus '  words that are often called the golden rule .  it states   just as you want men to do to you , do the same way to them .  like a loving father , our creator wants the very best for us .  he wants us to experience what the bible calls  the real life .  life today is not  the real life .  for millions , it is little more than existence  and is perilous at that .  to give you a preview of that  real life ,  consider some of the wonderful things that god ' s kingdom will do for its subjects .  in his days  christ ' s rule as king  the righteous will flourish , and peace will abound .  he will have subjects .  to the ends of the earth .  god  is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth .  he breaks the bow and shatters the spear .  there will be an abundance of grain on the earth  on the top of the mountains it will overflow .  they will build houses and live in them , and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage .  they will not build for someone else to inhabit , nor will they plant for others to eat .  the work of their hands my chosen ones will enjoy to the full .  the tent of god is with mankind .  he will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  under kingdom rule , people will be safe and secure and they will have an abundance of food jesus '  teachings give moral and spiritual strength .  all who respond may become true global citizens , peace - loving subjects of his world government     in his days the righteous will flourish ,  and peace will abound until the moon is no more .  while he was sitting on the mount of olives , the disciples approached him privately , saying   tell us , when will these things be , and what will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things .  for nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom , and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another .  and because of the increasing of lawlessness , the love of the greater number will grow cold .  there will be great earthquakes , and in one place after another food shortages and pestilences  and there will be fearful sights and from heaven great signs .  and i saw , and look .  a white horse , and the one seated on it had a bow  and a crown was given him , and he went out conquering and to complete his conquest .  and i saw , and look .  a black horse , and the one seated on it had a pair of scales in his hand .  a pale horse , and the one seated on it had the name death .  and the grave  was closely following him .  and authority was given them over the fourth part of the earth , to kill with a long sword and with food shortage and with deadly plague and by the wild beasts of the earth .  a roman silver coin that equaled a day ' s wage .  or  hades ,  that is , the common grave of mankind .  see glossary .  but know this , that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here .  the kings of the earth take their stand and high officials gather together  as one against jehovah and against his anointed one .  or  take counsel together .  or  his christ .  in the days of those kings the god of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed .  and this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people .  while still alive , they both were hurled into the fiery lake that burns with sulfur .  and all the birds were filled with their flesh .  or  in midair  overhead .  they are , in fact , expressions inspired by demons and they perform signs , and they go out to the kings of the entire inhabited earth , to gather them together to the war of the great day of god the almighty .  and they gathered them together to the place that is called in hebrew armageddon .  greek , har ma ge don  , from a hebrew term meaning  mountain of megiddo .  after this i saw , and look .  a great crowd , which no man was able to number , out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues ,  standing before the throne and before the lamb , dressed in white robes  and there were palm branches in their hands .  or  languages .  in response one of the elders said to me   these who are dressed in the white robes , who are they and where did they come from .  and he said to me   these are the ones who come out of the great tribulation , and they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the lamb .  then he went throughout the whole of gal i lee , teaching in their synagogues and preaching the good news of the kingdom and curing every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity among the people .  by now the hour had grown late , and his disciples came up to him and said   this place is isolated , and the hour is already late .  after finding out , they said   five , besides two fish .  then he broke the loaves up and began giving them to the disciples to place them before the people , and he divided up the two fish for all .  now a great violent windstorm broke out , and the waves kept crashing into the boat , so that the boat was close to being swamped .  so they woke him up and said to him   teacher , do you not care that we are about to perish .  and the wind abated , and a great calm set in .  do you not yet have any faith .  even the wind and the sea obey him .  or  fainthearted .  when he saw the crowds , he went up on the mountain  and after he sat down , his disciples came to him .  it is no longer usable for anything except to be thrown outside to be trampled on by men .  a city cannot be hid when located on a mountain .  i came , not to destroy , but to fulfill .  but whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in relation to the kingdom of the heavens .   '  will be liable to the fiery ge hen na .  first make your peace with your brother , and then come back and offer your gift .  for it is better for you to lose one of your members than for your whole body to be pitched into ge hen na .  for it is better for you to lose one of your members than for your whole body to land in ge hen na .  are not also the tax collectors doing the same thing .  are not also the people of the nations doing the same thing .  truly i say to you , they have their reward in full .  then your father who looks on in secret will repay you .  truly i say to you , they have their reward in full .  then your father who looks on in secret will repay you .  let your will take place , as in heaven , also on earth .  truly i say to you , they have their reward in full .  then your father who looks on in secret will repay you .  if , then , your eye is focused , your whole body will be bright .  if the light that is in you is really darkness , how great that darkness is .  you cannot slave for god and for riches .  does not life mean more than food and the body than clothing .  are you not worth more than they are .   '  or ,  what are we to drink .   '  or ,  what are we to wear .  your heavenly father knows that you need all these things .  each day has enough of its own troubles .  a rafter is in your own eye .  first remove the rafter from your own eye , and then you will see clearly how to remove the straw from your brother ' s eye .  this , in fact , is what the law and the prophets mean .  never do people gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles , do they .  get away from me , you workers of lawlessness .  or  satisfied .  or possibly ,  from what is wicked .  or possibly ,  from what is wicked .  or  full of light .  or  many miracles .  or  recognized .  this means everlasting life , their coming to know you , the only true god , and the one whom you sent , jesus christ .  faith is the assured expectation of what is hoped for , the evident demonstration  of realities that are not seen .  or  convincing evidence .  also , just as you want men to do to you , do  the same way to them .  or  keep doing .  safely treasuring up for themselves a fine foundation for the future , so that they may get a firm hold on the real life .  in his days the righteous will flourish ,  and peace will abound until the moon is no more .  or  will rule .  that is , the euphrates .  he will have pity on the lowly and the poor , and the lives  of the poor he will save .  or  redeem their souls .  he is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth .  he breaks the bow and shatters the spear  he burns the military wagons  with fire .  or possibly ,  the shields .  there will be an abundance of grain on the earth  on the top of the mountains it will overflow .  his fruit will flourish as in leb a non , and in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth .  they will build houses and live in them , and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage .  for the days of my people will be like the days of a tree , and the work of their hands my chosen ones will enjoy to the full .  with that i heard a loud voice from the throne say   look .  the tent of god is with mankind , and he will reside with them , and they will be his people .  and god himself will be with them .  the former things have passed away . 
if god cares about us , why has he allowed evil and suffering to go on for so long .  how can we be sure that we are living in the last days of the present world .  how do we know that the bible ' s promises about god ' s kingdom will come true .  can the bible help us make wise decisions in life now .  because our creator loves us , he has provided answers to those questions and many others .  to help you find those answers , go to our website , www .  org , which is dedicated to bible education .  on that website , you will find activities , articles , audio and video recordings , interviews , and a broad variety of publications , including the bible .  all are free of charge with no obligation . 
