when disaster strikes steps that can save lives
what you should know about energy conservation
is thrill - seeking worth the risk . 
it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit www .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures . 
the shape of seashells . 
why is it important to prepare for disasters .  the bible says   the shrewd person sees the danger and conceals himself , but the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences .  this magazine highlights what we should do before , during , and after a disaster .  the shrewd person sees the danger and conceals himself , but the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences .  or  penalty . 
cover subject  a deafening explosion nearly threw me to the floor .  smoke came from the air vents , and our high - rise office erupted in flames .  terrorist attack .  school shooting .  those terms appear in the headlines too often .  of course , it is one thing to read about a disaster  it is another to live through one .  what can you do before , during , and after a disaster to improve the likelihood of your survival .  no one is immune to disaster .  preparation is your most important key to survival .  but what does preparation involve .  prepare mentally .  acknowledge the fact that disasters happen and that you and your loved ones are potentially at risk .  it is too late to prepare after disaster strikes .  learn about disasters that can happen in your area .  know where shelters are .  consider whether the construction of your home and its location are as safe as possible .  remove fire hazards .  install smoke detectors , and change their batteries at least once a year , if not more often .  prepare emergency supplies .  power , water , phone , and transportation services can fail .  if you own a car , try to keep the fuel tank at least half full , and always have food , water , and an emergency kit in your home .  see the box  do you have what you need .  preparation is your most important key to survival  have access to the phone numbers of friends , both near and far .  make and rehearse an escape plan .  know the nearest exits in your building , as well as the emergency plan of your children ' s school .  set up family meeting places  such as a school or a library  one nearby and another outside your neighborhood .  authorities recommend that you practice walking with your family to those meeting points .  plan to help others , including the elderly and the infirm .  when fire broke out , most people didn ' t panic  they delayed ,  relates joshua , quoted at the outset .  some turned off a computer or filled a water bottle .  one man said ,  maybe we should just wait .   '   despite the hesitancy of others , joshua shouted   we need to get out of here now .  at that , his coworkers snapped out of denial and followed him down the stairs .  if anyone falls , pick him up and keep moving ,  joshua kept calling out .  we ' re all going to make it .  stay close to the floor , and move quickly to the nearest exit .  smoke makes it hard to see , and most fire deaths are caused by smoke inhalation .  leave behind personal items .  seconds can make the difference between life and death .  in an earthquake .  get under sturdy furniture or next to an inside wall .  expect aftershocks , and get outside and away from buildings as soon as you can .  trained rescuers may not arrive for hours , so try to rescue others if you can .  in a tsunami .  if the water suddenly rushes away from the shore , move quickly to higher ground .  expect more and larger waves .  in a tornado or a hurricane .  go to a storm shelter without delay .  stay out of flooded buildings .  avoid wading in or driving through water .  floodwater can contain sewage and conceal dangers , including debris , open manholes , and downed power lines .  did you know .  most deaths in a flood result when people try to drive through moving water .  if the authorities order evacuation , leave immediately .  let friends know where you are , or they may risk their lives looking for you .  if authorities order evacuation , leave immediately .  did you know .  text messaging may be more reliable than telephone voice service .  if the authorities direct residents to remain at home or shelter in place , stay inside .  in case of an outdoor chemical , biological , or nuclear accident or attack , stay indoors , turn off ventilation , and seal all doors and windows .  in a nuclear event , go to the lowest internal part of your building to reduce exposure to radiation .  listen to local tv or radio news .  stay indoors until authorities announce that the threat has passed .  to avoid disease and danger , consider the following recommendations   stay with friends , if possible , rather than in a camp .  keep your living space sanitary .  use personal protective equipment when cleaning up debris .  if possible , wear gloves , sturdy shoes , a hard hat , and a dust mask .  beware of electrical wires and hidden embers .  keep your daily routine as normal as possible .  your children need to see that you are calm and hopeful .  do school lessons , play , and worship as a family .  do not dwell on news coverage of the tragedy , and do not take out your anxiety or frustration on family members .  accept help , and help others .  after the disaster , keep your routine as normal as possible  acknowledge that disasters cause loss .  government and other relief efforts focus on helping people to survive , not on replacing everything that was lost .  to survive , we need clean water , food , clothing , and shelter from the weather .  recognize and address emotional injury .  this often surfaces after the initial shock has passed .  symptoms include anxiety , depression , and mood swings , as well as difficulty thinking , working , and sleeping .  talk to caring friends .  although joshua survived the fire in his workplace , many of his acquaintances did not .  he received assistance from christian elders and mental - health professionals .  they assured me that my grief was part of a natural healing process and that it would pass ,  joshua says .  after six months , the nightmares lessened .  other symptoms have lasted longer .  disasters assault our very sense of justice .  in response , some people mistakenly blame god .  many , like joshua , experience  survivor ' s guilt .  i still wonder if i could have saved more people ,  he says .  i am comforted by my belief that god will soon bring complete justice to the earth and will right all wrongs .  in the meantime , i cherish each day of life and do what i reasonably can to preserve it .  it is available for download at www .  disaster management organizations urge families to store and annually update emergency supplies .  of course , needs will vary according to your location and circumstances , so check with local emergency management services for recommendations that could be applied in your area .  in general it is recommended that you keep at least three gallons   of water per person and three days of nonperishable , ready - to - eat foods .  also , some families have prepared  go bags  with such items as the following     blankets , complete change of warm clothes , and sturdy shoes   flashlight , radio   , and spare batteries   first - aid kit and a whistle to signal for help   eating utensils , can opener , pocket tool set , and waterproof matches   dust masks , waterproof tape , and plastic sheeting for shelter   toothbrushes , soap , towels , and toilet paper   child - care supplies and special - needs items for seniors or the disabled   a waterproof container with needed medication , copies of prescriptions , and other important documents   list of emergency contacts and meeting places and a local map   credit cards and cash   extra set of house keys and car keys   paper , pencils , books , and games for children   bible   par .  you might also have to include some items not listed here .  for we have brought nothing into the world , and neither can we carry anything out .  or  sustenance .  or  shelter .   ,  covering .  and he will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  the former things have passed away .  i am making all things new .  also he says   write , for these words are faithful  and true .  or  trustworthy . 
we depend on energy to heat and cool our homes , fuel our vehicles , and accomplish many of our daily activities .  yet people around the world are facing serious energy challenges .  for gary , from south africa ,  the rising cost of fuel  is a big issue .  jennifer , from the philippines , is worried about reliable access to energy , since  power interruption is a common problem .  fernando , from el salvador , says he is  concerned about the ecological impact .  in many places around the world , energy sources pollute the environment .  naturally , you may wonder ,  how can i deal with these energy challenges .   '  we can all choose to use energy wisely .  both conserving energy and using it efficiently bring benefits .  by consuming less , we save money on our energy costs .  we also help protect the environment , not adding unnecessarily to the growing energy demand .  let us consider three areas in which we may be able to use energy more wisely  our home , transportation , and daily activities .  use heating and cooling equipment conservatively .  a study conducted in one european country revealed that turning down the thermostat during winter just two degrees to limit heating was the most energy - saving behavior over the course of a year .  derek , who lives in canada , agrees .  by wearing sweaters in winter instead of turning the furnace all the way up , our family saves energy ,  he says .  the same principle applies to cooling in warmer climates .  rodolfo , from the philippines , limits the use of his air conditioner by carefully setting the thermostat .  he states ,  we save money and also conserve energy .  keep windows and doors closed when heating or cooling your home .  we can avoid wasting energy by preventing heated or cooled air from escaping outdoors .  for example , leaving a door open in cold weather greatly increases the amount of energy required to heat a building .  beyond simply keeping windows and doors closed , some people have further reduced energy loss in their homes by installing better insulation and energy - efficient windows .  switch to more energy - efficient lighting .  instead of using traditional incandescent bulbs , we switched to new energy - efficient light bulbs ,  says jennifer , quoted earlier .  while new energy - efficient lighting products typically cost more up front , they consume much less energy during their lifetime , saving you money in the long run .  use public transportation if possible .  i use the train or cycle to work whenever i can ,  says andrew , from great britain .  the book energy  what everyone needs to know reminds us that  automobiles consume at least three times more energy per passenger than busses and short - distance trains .  organize your trips .  by planning ahead , you may be able to trim the number of trips you need to make , reducing your energy consumption while saving time and money .  jethro , from the philippines , sets a monthly fuel allowance for his car .  this makes me plan my trips more efficiently .  reduce the amount of hot water you use .  since heating water consumes energy , using less hot water conserves energy .  with good reason , victor , from south africa , says   we try to use as little hot water as possible when showering .  according to scientist steven kenway ,  saving hot water represents a real win - win - win ,  because  it cuts energy and water use for consumers , reduces energy demand for utilities , and helps households .  turn it off .  this includes lights , appliances , and electronic devices , such as tvs and computers .  even when turned off , many such devices still consume energy in standby mode .  some experts recommend unplugging them from their power source or using a switchable power strip to turn off this standby mode for further energy savings .  fernando , quoted earlier , has adopted this habit ,  i turn off lights and unplug appliances that i am not using .  we may personally have little control over the cost of energy or the environmental toll to produce it , but we can choose to use energy wisely .  people around the world are finding ways to do just that .  true , conserving energy may require more effort and planning , but consider the benefits .  valeria , from mexico , says ,  i save money , and i protect the environment .  for example , some appliances have specific fresh - air supply or venting guidelines that may require keeping a door or window open .  the bible contains helpful principles that encourage us to use resources wisely .  what steps can you take to avoid wastefulness .  how do your actions affect your neighbor .  your neighborhood .  but when they had eaten their fill , he said to his disciples   gather together the fragments left over , so that nothing is wasted .  as you look out not only for your own interests , but also for the interests of others . 
the bible ' s viewpoint in ancient times , the israelites waged war in the name of their god , jehovah .  does this mean that god approves of modern warfare .  the israelites worshipped a bloodthirsty  tribal war god .  the nations whom israel defeated were thoroughly corrupted by violence and depraved practices  including bestiality , incest , and child sacrifice .  after giving them centuries to change their ways , god said   it is by all these things that the nations that i am driving out from before you have made themselves unclean .  it is because of the wickedness of these nations that jehovah your god is driving them away from before you .  in many conflicts , religious leaders on both sides claim that god is on their side .  religion has always played a part in every war that was ever fought ,  says the book the causes of war .  christians are not authorized to fight against their enemies .  the apostle paul wrote to fellow christians   if possible , as far as it depends on you , be peaceable with all men .  do not avenge yourselves .  instead of sending his followers to war , jesus told them   continue to love your enemies and to pray for those who persecute you , so that you may prove yourselves sons of your father who is in the heavens .  even when the nation in which they live goes to war , christians should remain neutral ,  no part of the world .  if god wants his worshippers in all nations to love their enemies and to remain separate from the world , how could he support either side of a violent conflict today .  my kingdom is no part of this world .  if my kingdom were part of this world , my attendants would have fought that i should not be handed over to the jews .  but as it is , my kingdom is not from this source .  war is inevitable .  there is no danger of universal and perpetual peace breaking out in this century .  wars will end when no one has the desire to wage war .  consequently , god ' s kingdom  a real government that rules from heaven  will soon act to disarm our planet and to teach humans to pursue peace .  the bible assures us that god will  set matters straight respecting mighty nations far away .  they will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears .  nation will not lift up sword against nation , nor will they learn war anymore .  the bible teaches that under god ' s kingdom there will no longer be national governments competing for their own interests , unjust policies prompting citizens to revolt , or prejudice that fuels ethnic divisions .  as a result , war will vanish .  they will not cause any harm or any ruin ,  god promises ,  because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of jehovah as the waters cover the sea .  he is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth .  he breaks the bow and shatters the spear  he burns the military wagons with fire .  you must not allow any of your offspring to be offered  to mo lech .  you must not profane the name of your god in that way .  i am jehovah .  it is a detestable act .  it is a violation of what is natural .  or  devoted  sacrificed .  they have built the high places of to pheth , which is in the valley of the son of hin nom ,  in order to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire , something that i had not commanded and that had never even come into my heart .   '    see glossary ,  gehenna .  or  had never entered my thoughts .  it is not because of your righteousness or the uprightness of your heart that you are going in to take possession of their land .  instead , it is because of the wickedness of these nations that jehovah your god is driving them away from before you and in order to carry out the word that jehovah swore to your forefathers , abraham , isaac , and jacob .  if possible , as far as it depends on you , be peaceable with all men .  that is , god ' s wrath .  if you were part of the world , the world would be fond of what is its own .  now because you are no part of the world , but i have chosen you out of the world , for this reason the world hates you .  jesus answered   my kingdom is no part of this world .  if my kingdom were part of this world , my attendants would have fought that i should not be handed over to the jews .  but as it is , my kingdom is not from this source .  he will render judgment among many peoples and set matters straight  respecting mighty nations far away .  they will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears .  nation will not lift up sword against nation , nor will they learn war anymore .  or  correct matters .  they will not cause any harm or any ruin in all my holy mountain , because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of jehovah as the waters cover the sea .  he is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth .  he breaks the bow and shatters the spear  he burns the military wagons  with fire .  or possibly ,  the shields . 
help for the family   young people  i stood close to a high - speed train that was racing by in a tunnel .  the rush of adrenaline made my problems seem to fade .  diving into water from dangerously high cliffs , i felt completely free for a few seconds .  usually i enjoyed it , but sometimes i was scared .  like leon and larissa , many young people get a thrill out of testing their limits  sometimes in very risky ways .  are you tempted to join in .  if so , this article can help you .  thrill - seeking can become an addiction .  it might give you a short - term high but leave you craving greater excitement .  marco , who like leon went into train tunnels , says   it was a vicious circle .  i was happy for a moment .  but then i needed yet another thrill .  justin , who went high - speed skating by grabbing hold of passing cars , says   the thrill i felt made me want to do it again .  i wanted people to admire me , but i ended up in the hospital .  peer pressure can make you ignore common sense .  a young man named marvin says   my friends pressured me to free - climb a tall building , saying   go on .  you can do it .   '  i felt very insecure .  i was trembling as i pulled myself up the wall .  larissa , mentioned earlier , says   i did what everybody else did .  i just went along with it .  the internet too is used by some to create a form of peer pressure by praising thrill - seekers and downplaying the risks .  in fact , some dares posted on social media go viral , giving thrill - seekers recognition and attention .  for example , some popular videos depict parkour  an activity that involves traversing obstacles   by running , climbing , or jumping rapidly and efficiently without any safety equipment .  this could lead you to two mistaken conclusions    the risks are minimal .  everyone is doing it .  the result  you may be tempted to try out activities that involve life - threatening risks .  there are better and safer ways to test your limits .  physical training is beneficial for a little ,  says the bible .  but the scriptures also caution you to  live with soundness of mind .  how can you do that .  weigh the risks .  the bible says   the shrewd person acts with knowledge , but the fool exposes his own foolishness .  before you consider engaging in a certain activity , get to know the risks involved .  ask yourself ,  does this activity amount to little more than a gamble with death or serious injury .  choose friends who show respect for life .  true friends will not encourage you to take risks or try to talk you into doing something you feel uncomfortable about .  larissa says   good and stable friends helped me to make better choices about activities i wanted to participate in .  when my friends changed , so did my life .  ask yourself ,  does this activity amount to little more than a gamble with death or serious injury .   '  enjoy your skills without risking your life .  part of growing up is  learning how to establish one ' s own principles and boundaries ,  says the book adolescent risk behaviors .  you can test your limits in a safe environment , using appropriate safety equipment and precautions .  build genuine self - respect .  people will respect you for how skillfully you master real - life challenges , not for what you dare to do for a thrill .  larissa says   cliff diving was just a start of a phase in my life that was full of self - destructive behavior .  it would have been better if i had learned to say no .  the bottom line  rather than take needless risks by thrill - seeking , show good judgment with regard to your choice of recreation .  the shrewd one ponders each step .  the one walking with the wise will become wise .  the path of life leads upward to one with insight , to turn him away from the grave below .  peter  the risks involved should be just as clear to you as the fun .  after all , no young person wants to end up in a wheelchair .  rio  if your friends are going to do something you don ' t want to do , then it ' s best not to go with them .  once you ' re there , it is usually too late to say no or to change your mind .  for physical training  is beneficial for a little , but godly devotion is beneficial for all things , as it holds promise of the life now and the life that is to come .  or  exercise .  it trains us to reject ungodliness and worldly desires and to live with soundness of mind and righteousness and godly devotion amid this present system of things ,   or  this present age .  see glossary .  the shrewd person acts with knowledge , but the fool exposes his own foolishness .  the naive  person believes every word , but the shrewd one ponders each step .  or  inexperienced .  the one walking with the wise will become wise , but the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly .  the path of life leads upward to one with insight , to turn him away from the grave  below .  or  sheol ,  that is , the common grave of mankind .  see glossary .  the naive  person believes every word , but the shrewd one ponders each step .  or  inexperienced .  the one walking with the wise will become wise , but the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly .  the path of life leads upward to one with insight , to turn him away from the grave  below .  or  sheol ,  that is , the common grave of mankind .  see glossary . 
city of astana lands and peoples kazakhs traditionally lived as nomads .  to this day , some kazakh herders move their animals to different pastures according to the season .  they spend the summer in cooler highland grazing lands .  then , as the snowy winter approaches , they bring their flocks down to the warmer lowlands .  some kazakhs live in modern developed cities .  yet , many traditions , foods , and handicrafts reflect their ancestors '  nomadic way of life .  kazakhs enjoy a rich heritage of poetry , songs , and music played on local musical instruments .  the yurt  the traditional portable house of nomads  has become a symbol of man living in harmony with nature .  shepherds still favor the yurt , and urban kazakhs often use them for special events .  yurts also serve as comfortable tourist accommodations .  the interior of a yurt can be a showplace for kazakh women ' s diverse embroidering , weaving , and carpet - making skills .  inside a yurt rural kazakh families treasure their horses .  a fine horse still makes a costly and cherished gift .  in the countryside , boys learn to ride from an early age .  a traditional kazakh meal should always include meat and is usually not spicy .  among kazakhs '  favorite drinks are koumiss , which is made from mare ' s milk and is said to provide many health benefits , and rich , slightly sour shubat , made from camel ' s milk .  the branch office of jehovah ' s witnesses in almaty welcomes visitors and is open for tours .  the water of kazakhstan ' s lake balkhash is salty in the eastern part and nearly salt - free in the western part .  falconry with trained eagles and other birds of prey remains popular .  kazakhs excel in training golden eagles  their favorite species . 
was it designed .  seashells enable mollusks to live in harsh conditions , resisting tremendous pressures on the seabed .  this ability to provide optimum protection inspired engineers to study the shape and structure of seashells with a view to designing vehicles and buildings that will protect their occupants .  consider  engineers analyzed two seashell forms  bivalve   and spiral .  in the case of the bivalve , it was found that the ribbing on the exterior of a shell directed stresses toward its hinge and outer edges .  in contrast , the curving exterior of a spiral shell directed pressure toward its core and wide top .  in both cases , the seashells '  shapes channeled pressure to their strongest areas , meaning that in the event of damage , harm to the mollusk would be less likely .  researchers also ran comparative stress tests on real shells and on simple hemispheres and cones   that mimicked shells '  shapes and composition .  the results showed that natural seashells '  complex surfaces nearly doubled their ability to withstand pressure when compared to the simple shapes .  commenting on the applications of this research , scientific american says   if you wind up driving a shell - shaped car someday , it ' ll be both stylish and designed to protect the soft bodies inside .  what do you think  did the shape of seashells evolve .  or was it designed . 
community and political involvement why don ' t jehovah ' s witnesses go to war .  jehovah ' s witnesses are known worldwide for refusing to go to war .  learn why we take this stand .  helping the community when disaster strikes , love moves us to action in dozens of countries , jehovah ' s witnesses have provided assistance in times of need . 
