it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit donate .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures . 
as world conditions worsen , more of us are suffering the tragic consequences of both natural disasters and man - made problems .  learn how you can cope with such challenges and minimize their effect on you and your loved ones . 
a world in turmoil  how can you cope . 
do you feel that the problems common in the world are now , more than ever , affecting you personally .  do you encounter any of the following where you live .  armed conflicts   epidemics   natural disasters   poverty   prejudice   violent crime when tragedy strikes , many victims experience shock and hopelessness .  some people react to calamities with what has been called emotional flatness .  yet , when facing a tragedy , prolonged shock and emotional paralysis only make things worse .  in the midst of turmoil , you must act decisively to protect your loved ones , your health , your livelihood , and your happiness .  what can you do now to minimize the impact that this world ' s turmoil has on you personally . 
a world in turmoil a crisis or a disaster can negatively affect people ' s health either directly or indirectly .  adversities leave people feeling stressed , and prolonged stress can make them more susceptible to illness .  crises can strain health - care systems and limit the availability of medical resources .  calamities affect people ' s finances , hindering their ability to pay for essentials such as nutritious food or health care .  serious illness and mental stress can affect your judgment , which can cause you to neglect healthy habits .  as a result , you may become even sicker .  left untreated , health problems can worsen and even threaten your life .  the healthier you are , the better prepared you will be to make good decisions in the midst of turmoil .  regardless of your economic situation , you can take steps to protect your health .  whenever possible , a wise person considers potential dangers and takes preventive measures to avoid them .  this may be applied to health .  often you can minimize the risk of disease or its severity by practicing good hygiene .  prevention is better than cure .  by keeping ourselves and our living space clean , we definitely save on expenses related to doctor visits and medication .  some names in this magazine have been changed .  during times of turmoil , protect your health by following these practical steps practice good hygiene the bible says   the shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself .  try to anticipate and avoid potential threats to your health .  wash your hands frequently with soap and water , especially before touching food or after using the toilet .  regularly clean and disinfect your home , particularly surfaces and objects that are touched frequently .  whenever possible , avoid close contact with people who have an infectious disease .  maintain a healthy diet the bible says   no man ever hated his own body , but he feeds and cherishes it .  we show that we love our body by being careful about what we take in .  drink plenty of water .  eat a wide variety of fruits and vegetables .  limit your intake of fats , salt , and sugars .  do not use tobacco or abuse alcohol or drugs .  to avoid getting sick , we try to maintain a healthy diet  otherwise , we would have to spend our small income on medical expenses .  we prefer to invest in a good diet .  exercise the bible says   better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  we need to balance work with sufficient rest .  stay physically active .  you can start by just taking regular walks .  physical activity can improve your health even if you are older , disabled , or limited by chronic illness .  get rest   get proper rest .  in the short term , insufficient sleep can increase stress and reduce concentration .  over time , it can lead to serious health problems .  set a realistic time to go to bed , and follow through with it .  try to go to bed and get up at the same time every day .  avoid watching tv or using electronic devices in bed .  avoid heavy meals , caffeine , and alcohol before bedtime .  i find that my sleep affects all aspects of my health .  if i do not sleep enough , i sometimes get headaches and my body feels sore .  but when i get plenty of sleep , i feel as though i could take on the world .  i have lots of energy , and i get sick much less frequently .  watch the video virus outbreaks  what you can do .  also , read the article  ways to improve your health .  the shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself , but the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences .  or  penalty .  for no man ever hated his own body , but he feeds and cherishes it , just as the christ does the congregation ,      better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind . 
a world in turmoil many people struggle each day just trying to make ends meet .  sadly , world turmoil can make that challenge even more difficult .  communities in turmoil experience a rise in the cost of living  including food and housing .  crises can increase unemployment or decrease wages .  disasters can damage or destroy people ' s business establishments , homes , or other assets , forcing many into poverty .  the better you manage your money , the better you may be able to cope during a crisis .  financial security is not necessarily permanent  income , savings , and assets can lose value .  there are things that money cannot buy , such as happiness and family unity .  the bible says   having food and clothing , we will be content with these things .  being content involves limiting our wants and being satisfied when our daily needs are met .  this is especially important when our livelihood has been affected .  to be content , you may have to adjust your lifestyle .  if you live beyond your means , your financial situation will only get worse .  during times of turmoil , protect your livelihood by following these practical steps reduce expenses   delay upgrading or replacing appliances or clothing .  ask yourself   can i do without a vehicle .  can i plant a vegetable garden .   '    before buying something , ask yourself   do i really need it .  can i afford it .   '    apply for government or humanitarian assistance if it is available .  we sat down as a family and looked at our lifestyle .  we canceled or reduced any forms of recreation that cost money .  we also started preparing meals that cost less .  make a budget the bible says   the plans of the diligent surely lead to success , but all who are hasty surely head for poverty .  a budget will help you make sure that your expenses do not exceed your income .  first , list your expected monthly income .  next , itemize your current monthly expenses and carefully examine your spending habits .  then compare your income with your expenses , and if necessary , identify what you can reduce or eliminate to stay within your income .  each month , we make a list of our income and expenses .  we try to maintain an emergency fund and plan for future expenses .  thanks to this , we are less anxious because we know in advance how we will use our income .  avoid debt   save money   have a good plan to reduce debt .  if possible , avoid debt altogether .  instead , try to save up to buy what you need .  set aside a little money each month to have a fund for expected or unexpected future expenses .  the bible says   there is benefit in every kind of hard work .  work hard   keep a job   maintain a good attitude about your work .  even if your job is not your dream job , it still gives you an income .  strive to be industrious and dependable .  this can help you keep your employment or , at the very least , make it easier for you to obtain future employment .  i take the jobs that are available , even if i don ' t like the work or the salary isn ' t as much as i would expect .  i am always conscientious and do good , quality work , as though i were working for myself .  if you are looking for work .  take the initiative .  call on businesses that could have jobs you can do , even if they have not advertised a position .  tell friends and family that you are looking for work .  be adaptable .  you are unlikely to find a job that has everything you want .  read  how to live on less .  so , having food  and clothing ,  we will be content with these things .  or  sustenance .  or  shelter .   ,  covering .  the plans of the diligent surely lead to success ,  but all who are hasty surely head for poverty .  or  advantage .  there is benefit in every kind of hard work , but mere talk leads to want . 
a world in turmoil as anxiety over world turmoil increases , many people unwittingly allow their relationships to suffer .  people isolate themselves from their friends .  spouses become increasingly contentious with each other .  parents pay little or no attention to the anxieties of their children .  friendships are essential to your health and stability , especially during difficult times .  the stress that results from world turmoil can test your family life in unexpected ways .  disturbing news reports may affect your children more intensely than you realize .  the bible says   a true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress .  think of someone who is supportive and can give practical advice .  just knowing that someone cares can strengthen your determination to face up to the day ' s challenges .  during times of turmoil , protect your relationships by following these practical steps strengthen your marriage the bible says   two are better than one .  for if one of them falls , the other can help his partner up .  marriage mates should act as a pilot and a copilot with the same flight plan , not as two fighter jets on a collision course .  resolve that you will not take out your stress on each other .  patience and tolerance go a long way .  at least once a week , discuss with your mate the situations that need to be addressed .  remember to target the problem  not each other .  make time to do things together that you both enjoy .  reminisce about good times that you have shared together , perhaps looking at photos of your wedding or other pleasant memories .  a couple might not agree on everything , but that doesn ' t mean that they can ' t work as a team .  a couple can make a decision together and then work together to make that decision succeed .  maintain your friendships   in addition to receiving support from friends , think of ways you can give support .  by strengthening others , you strengthen yourself .  reach out to a couple of friends each day to see how they are doing .  ask your friends how they have coped with challenges that are similar to the ones you are facing .  when you face a storm of adversity , friends are like a point of reference .  they can nudge you in the right direction , even if it ' s just by reminding you of things that you already know .  friends care for you , and they know that you care for them .  be a supportive parent the bible says   be quick to listen , slow to speak .  initially , your children may be reluctant to express their fears and concerns , but by patiently listening , you will help them to open up .  create an environment that makes it comfortable for your children to express themselves .  some children talk more readily while relaxed , such as when riding in the car or walking , rather than when sitting with a parent face - to - face .  make sure that your children are not overexposed to disturbing news reports .  let your children know what steps you have taken to keep the family safe .  have a plan for emergencies , and rehearse it with your children .  talk to your children , and allow them to express how they feel .  they might be hiding their fear , anxiety , or anger .  let them know that you struggle with the same feelings , and tell them how you ' ve dealt with such feelings .  watch your family can be happy .  a true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress .  two are better than one because they have a good reward  for their hard work .  but what will happen to the one who falls with no one to help him up .  or  greater benefit .  know this , my beloved brothers  everyone must be quick to listen , slow to speak , slow to anger , . 
a world in turmoil anxiety over world turmoil can take a toll on people physically and emotionally .  many who have been affected by these events see no hope on the horizon .  how do they react .  some refuse even to think about the future .  others escape their anxieties through alcohol or drugs .  a few conclude that death is preferable to life .  some of the problems you face might be temporary and could change unexpectedly for the better .  even if your situation does not change , there are things you can do that can help you deal with it .  the bible provides genuine hope  a permanent solution to mankind ' s problems .  the bible says   never be anxious about the next day , for the next day will have its own anxieties .  each day has enough of its own troubles .  take one day at a time .  do not let anxieties about tomorrow keep you from handling today ' s responsibilities .  worrying about negative things that might happen will only add to your stress and weaken your hope for a better future .  the bible says   all the days of the afflicted one are bad , but the one with a cheerful heart has a continual feast .  a negative outlook can blind you to solutions that are readily available .  in contrast , a positive attitude might help you think of ways to deal with your situation .  limit the amount of time and attention you give to the news .  at the end of each day , list two or three things for which you can be thankful .  make a to - do list , and include only what you can do today .  break down larger tasks into smaller ones so that you will see the results of your efforts at the end of the day .  the bible says   whoever isolates himself .  rejects all practical wisdom .  you cannot climb out of a deep pit by yourself , but with a helping hand , you can succeed .  reach out to family members or friends for support .  also , look for ways that you can help them .  doing things for others will help you keep your problems in perspective .  if you have lost hope and feel that life is not worth living , consider getting a medical checkup .  sometimes feeling overwhelmed is a symptom of a health disorder , such as depression .  many people have been helped by getting treatment .  does not endorse any particular health treatment .  an ancient psalmist said in prayer to god   your word is a lamp to my foot , and a light for my path .  consider how the bible  god ' s word  is just that .  on a dark night , a lamp helps us decide where to walk .  likewise , the bible contains practical wisdom that can guide us when we need to make a difficult decision .  a light can illuminate our path so that we can see what is farther ahead .  in a similar way , the bible can illuminate our view of what the future holds .  the bible is a sacred book that not only traces man ' s history from the start but also provides genuine hope for the future .  it answers these questions  how suffering began  the bible says that  through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin , and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned .  why human rule has failed to fix our problems  the bible says that  it does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step .  a look at the world scene confirms that fact .  what god will do to address the situation  the bible shows that  he will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  watch why study the bible .  so never be anxious about the next day , for the next day will have its own anxieties .  each day has enough of its own troubles .  all the days of the afflicted one are bad , but the one with a cheerful  heart has a continual feast .  whoever isolates himself pursues his own selfish desires  he rejects  all practical wisdom .  or  shows contempt for .  your word is a lamp to my foot , and a light for my path .  that is why , just as through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin , and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned .  i well know , o jehovah , that man ' s way does not belong to him .  it does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step .  and he will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  the former things have passed away . 
the world is in turmoil .  sooner or later , natural disasters and man - made problems are likely to bring suffering to each one of us .  how can you and your family cope with the turmoil affecting mankind .  learn how you can . 
at the very least , an illness is an inconvenience and an expense .  you not only feel bad , but when you are sick , you may not be able to go to work or school , earn any money , or look after your family .  you may even need someone to look after you , and you may have to pay for expensive medicines and treatment .  well has it been said that  prevention is better than cure .  some illnesses cannot be avoided .  still , there is much you can do to slow down or even prevent the onset of illness .  consider five things that you can do today to get on the road to better health .  one of the easiest ways to catch a cold or influenza is to rub your nose or your eyes when your hands have been contaminated by germs .  your best defense against such contamination is to wash your hands regularly .  good hygiene can also prevent the spread of more serious conditions , such as pneumonia and diarrheal diseases , which every year cause the death of over two million children under the age of five .  even the spread of deadly ebola can be minimized by the simple habit of washing hands .  there are certain times when hand washing is particularly important to protect your own health and that of others .  you should wash your hands    after using the toilet .  after changing diapers or helping a child to use the toilet .  before and after treating a wound or a cut .  before and after being with someone who is sick .  before preparing , serving , or eating food .  after sneezing , coughing , or blowing your nose .  after touching an animal or animal waste .  after handling garbage .  and do not take it for granted that you are cleaning your hands properly .  studies have shown that a large percentage of those who use public toilets do not wash their hands afterward or do not wash them correctly .  how should you wash your hands .  wet your hands in clean running water and apply soap .  rub your hands together to make a lather , not forgetting to clean your nails , your thumbs , the backs of your hands , and between your fingers .  rinse in clean running water .  dry with a clean cloth or a paper towel .  such measures are simple but can avert illness and save lives .  yet , access to clean water can become a concern in any part of the world when a main supply that is usually good to drink becomes contaminated as a result of a flood , a storm , a pipe break , or some other issue .  if water does not come from a safe source or is not stored correctly , it can cause parasite infestation , as well as cholera , life - threatening diarrhea , typhoid , hepatitis , and other infections .  cholera is most often contracted when a person drinks water or eats food that is contaminated with fecal matter from infected people .  what steps can you take to protect yourself , even in the immediate aftermath of a disaster , from this and other types of water contamination .  ensure that all your drinking water  including the water used for brushing teeth , making ice , washing food and dishes , or cooking  comes from a safe source , such as an adequately treated public supply or sealed bottles from a reputable firm .  if there is any possibility that your piped supply has been contaminated , boil your water before use or treat it with an appropriate chemical product .  when using chemicals , such as chlorine or water - purifying tablets , follow the maker ' s directions carefully .  use quality water filters , if available and affordable .  always store treated water in clean , covered containers to protect it from possible recontamination .  ensure that any vessel used to take water from your stored supply , such as a ladle , is clean .  handle water containers with clean hands , and do not dip your hands or fingers into water used for drinking .  you may need to consider your intake of salt , fats , and sugar , and you should watch your portion sizes .  include fruits and vegetables in your diet , and vary what you eat .  reading the packaging will help you to select whole - grain foods when buying bread , cereals , pasta , or rice .  these are richer in nutrients and fiber than the alternatives made from refined grain .  as for proteins , eat small and lean portions of meat and poultry and try to eat fish a couple of times a week , if possible .  in some lands it is also possible to find protein - rich foods from vegetable sources .  if you eat too many sugars and solid fats , you risk becoming overweight .  to minimize this risk , drink water instead of sweet beverages .  eat more fruit instead of sugary desserts .  limit your intake of solid fats from such items as sausages , meat , butter , cakes , cheese , and cookies .  and instead of using solid fats for cooking , you may want to use healthier oils .  too much salt , or sodium , in the diet can raise your blood pressure to an unhealthy level .  if this is your problem , use the information on food packaging to keep your sodium intake low .  instead of salt , use herbs and spices to flavor your meals .  how much you eat can be as important as what you eat .  so , while enjoying your food , do not keep eating after you are no longer hungry .  an issue tied to nutrition is the risk of food poisoning .  any food can poison you if it is not prepared and stored properly .  most recover without lasting ill effects , but some die from it .  what can you do to minimize the risk .  vegetables grow in soil that may have been treated with manure , so wash these items carefully before preparing them .  wash your hands , cutting board , utensils , dishes , and countertops with hot , soapy water before preparing each item .  to avoid cross - contamination , never put food on a surface or plate that was previously in contact with raw eggs , poultry , meat , or fish , without first washing that surface .  cook until the food reaches the right temperature , and promptly refrigerate any perishable items that are not going to be eaten immediately .  many people today do not exercise enough .  why is exercise important .  staying physically active can help you to    sleep well .  stay mobile .  maintain strong bones and muscles .  maintain or achieve a healthy weight .  lower your risk of suffering from depression .  lower your risk of premature death .  if you do not stay physically active , you are more likely to    suffer from heart disease .  develop high blood pressure .  develop high cholesterol .  suffer a stroke .  the kind of physical activity that is right for you depends on your age and your health , so it would be wise to consult your doctor before beginning any new exercise program .  choose an activity that is fun .  you might consider basketball , tennis , soccer , brisk walking , cycling , gardening , chopping wood , swimming , canoeing , jogging , or other aerobic exercise .  how can you tell whether an activity is moderate or vigorous .  a general guide would be that moderate activity makes you sweat , but more vigorous exercise makes it hard for you to hold a conversation while doing it .  getting the right amount of rest should not be considered optional .  according to experts , sufficient sleep is important for    growth and development in children and teenagers .  learning and retention of new information .  maintaining the right balance of hormones that impact metabolism and weight .  cardiovascular health .  disease prevention .  insufficient sleep has been linked to obesity , depression , heart disease , diabetes , and tragic accidents .  surely these give us good reason to want to get enough rest .  so , what can you do if you realize that you have a problem getting enough sleep .  try to go to bed and get up at the same time every day .  make your bedroom quiet , dark , relaxing , and neither too warm nor too cold .  do not watch tv or use gadgets while in bed .  make your bed as comfortable as possible .  avoid heavy meals , caffeine , and alcohol before bedtime .  if after applying these suggestions you still suffer from insomnia or other sleep disorders  such as excessive daytime sleepiness or gasping for breath while sleeping  you may want to consult a qualified health - care professional .  your health is affected by realities over which you have no control  such as economic conditions , the availability of resources , and so on .  in all likelihood , however , it should be within your means to adopt at least some of the suggestions given in the foregoing article .  as a wise man of ancient times put it ,  the shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself .  readers of the holy scriptures are comforted by the trustworthy promise that one day soon ,  no resident will say   i am sick .   '     in the meantime , do all you can to safeguard your health and that of your loved ones .  footnotes  for more information , please see the book what does the bible really teach .  published by jehovah ' s witnesses , or visit our web site , jw . 
pandemics , natural disasters , political turmoil , and armed conflicts can quickly disrupt the economy .  while a sudden loss of income can be stressful , practical steps based on the wisdom found in the bible can help you live on less money .  accept your changed situation .  bible principle   i have learned .  how to have an abundance and how to do without .  even though you will have less money than before , you can learn to adapt to your new financial circumstances .  the sooner you accept the reality of your situation and begin adjusting , the better you and your family will be able to cope .  learn about government or humanitarian assistance that may now be available to you .  act quickly , since such programs often give candidates a limited time to apply for aid .  work together as a family .  bible principle   plans fail when there is no consultation , but there is accomplishment through many advisers .  discuss the situation with your spouse and children .  with good communication , you can help everyone in the family understand and support changes that might be needed .  and when everyone works together to be frugal and avoid wastefulness , your funds will go further .  create a budget .  bible principle   sit down and calculate the expense .  when you are forced to live on less , it is more important than ever to know where all your money goes .  create a budget by first listing your expected monthly income based on your new situation .  next , itemize your current monthly expenses and spending habits , even though you know these must change .  try to include in your monthly expenses a set amount of money that you want to save for unexpected expenses or emergencies .  tip  when tracking your expenses , do not forget to include smaller purchases .  you may be surprised at how much these add up over time .  for example , after tracking his expenses , one man realized that every year he was spending several hundred dollars on chewing gum .  prioritize your expenses and make changes .  bible principle   make sure of the more important things .  compare your income with your expenses , and identify what you can eliminate or reduce so that you can keep within your reduced income .  examine the following areas    transportation .  if you own more than one vehicle , could you sell one .  if you own a luxury model , could you switch to a more economical one .  could you use public transportation or a bicycle and do without a vehicle altogether .  entertainment .  can you cancel , at least for a time , paid subscriptions to streaming , satellite , or cable tv services .  can you find lower - cost alternatives .  for example , your local library may lend movies , e - books , and audiobooks without charge .  discuss as a family how to reduce on water , electricity , and fuel costs .  turning off lights and taking shorter showers may seem insignificant , but such habits can help save money .  avoid eating out at restaurants .  instead , cook meals at home .  plan your meals , buy and cook in bulk when possible , and reuse leftovers .  make a list before you go shopping to avoid making impulse purchases .  shop for fresh foods that are in season , which are usually less expensive .  avoid purchasing junk food .  consider planting a vegetable garden .  purchase items only when you need to replace those that are worn out , not to stay in fashion .  look for end - of - season sales or items in good condition in thrift or secondhand stores .  line - dry clothing if the weather and your circumstances permit  this will save the utility costs of using the clothes dryer .  future purchases .  before you buy something , ask yourself   can i afford it .  do i really need it .   '  can you delay upgrading or replacing appliances , electronic devices , or vehicles .  on the other hand , can you sell items that you no longer use or need .  doing so can help you simplify and add to your income .  tip  when your income is abruptly reduced , you may find added incentive to quit habits that are harmful and expensive , such as tobacco use , gambling , or alcohol abuse .  making such adjustments will not only help your finances but also improve the quality of your life .  give attention to spiritual matters .  bible principle   happy are those conscious of their spiritual need .  the bible offers this balanced approach   wisdom is a protection just as money is a protection , but the advantage of knowledge is this  wisdom preserves the life of its owner .  such wisdom is found in the bible , and many people have found that applying its guidance helps them to avoid excessive anxiety about financial matters . 
