it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit donate .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures . 
find relief from stress  everyone has stress to some degree , yet i am overwhelmed with stress .  it is not from just one big problem but from many situations , from struggles , and from seemingly unending years of caring for my physically and mentally ill husband .  my wife left me , and i had to raise two children on my own .  it was hard being a single parent .  on top of that , i lost my job and i couldn ' t afford to get my vehicle inspected for registration .  i had no idea how to handle things .  the stress was overwhelming .  i knew deep down that it was wrong to kill myself , so i begged god to end my misery .  like jill and barry , do you sometimes feel overwhelmed with stress .  if so , may the following articles comfort and help you .  they examine common causes of stress , how stress can affect us , and how we can get at least a measure of stress relief .  names have been changed . 
find relief from stress  most adults report being under increasing levels of stress ,  says the well - known mayo clinic .  modern life is filled with change and uncertainty .  consider just some of the changes and uncertainties that contribute to stress    divorce   the death of a loved one   severe illness   serious accidents   crime   a hectic pace of life   disasters  natural or man - made   pressures at school or work   worries about employment and financial security says the american psychological association ,  can be devastating , putting unemployed workers at risk for physical illness , marital strain , anxiety , depression and even suicide .  loss of a job affects every part of life .  it is not uncommon for children to suffer from stress .  some are bullied at school or neglected at home .  others are abused physically , emotionally , or sexually .  many are anxious about exams and school grades .  still others see their family torn apart by divorce .  stressed children may have nightmares , learning difficulties , depression , or a tendency to be withdrawn .  some seem unable to control their emotions .  a child suffering from stress needs urgent help . 
find relief from stress stress is your body ' s response to a demanding situation .  your brain causes hormones to flood your system .  these increase your heart rate , regulate your blood pressure , expand or constrict the capacity of your lungs , and tense your muscles .  before you are fully aware of what is happening , your body is primed for action .  when a stressful episode is over , your body comes off  high alert  and returns to normal .  stress is a natural response that enables you to deal with challenging or dangerous situations .  the stress response begins in your brain .  beneficial stress enables you to act or react quickly .  a certain amount of stress can also help you to reach your goals or to perform better , perhaps during an exam , a job interview , or a sporting event .  however , prolonged , extreme , or chronic stress can harm you .  when your body is repeatedly or constantly on  high alert ,  you may begin to suffer physically , emotionally , and mentally .  your behavior , including the way you treat others , may change .  chronic stress can also lead to substance abuse and other unhealthy means of coping .  it may even spiral into depression , burnout , or thoughts of suicide .  while stress may not affect everyone in the same way , it can contribute to a wide range of diseases .  and it can affect nearly every part of the body .  nervous system .  your nervous system causes hormones such as adrenaline and cortisol to be released .  these increase your heart rate , your blood pressure , and the glucose levels in your blood  all of which enable you to respond quickly to danger .  too much stress can lead to   irritability , anxiety , depression , headaches , insomnia musculoskeletal system .  your muscles tense up to protect you from injury .  too much stress can lead to   body aches and pains , tension headaches , muscle spasms respiratory system .  you breathe faster to take in more oxygen .  too much stress can lead to   hyperventilation and shortness of breath , as well as panic attacks in those who are prone to them cardiovascular system .  your heart beats faster and harder to distribute blood throughout your body .  blood vessels dilate or constrict to direct blood where your body needs it the most , such as in your muscles .  too much stress can lead to   high blood pressure , heart attack , stroke endocrine system .  your glands produce the hormones adrenaline and cortisol , which help the body react to stress .  your liver increases your blood - sugar level to give you more energy .  too much stress can lead to   diabetes , lower immunity and increased illness , mood swings , weight gain gastrointestinal system .  the way your body processes food is disrupted .  too much stress can lead to   nausea , vomiting , diarrhea , constipation reproductive system .  stress can affect sexual desire and function .  too much stress can lead to   impotence , disrupted menstrual cycle . 
find relief from stress to deal effectively with stress , you need to think about your physical health , the way you interact with others , and your goals and priorities in life  that is , what you consider to be truly important .  this article will review some practical principles that can help you to deal better with stress and perhaps even reduce it .  never be anxious about the next day , for the next day will have its own anxieties .  meaning  daily anxieties are a part of life .  but do not increase today ' s anxieties by adding tomorrow ' s to them .  try to live one day at a time .  stress can cause anxiety .  so try this  first , recognize that some stress is inevitable .  fretting over things you cannot prevent increases your stress .  second , understand that quite often things do not turn out the way we may fear they will .  the wisdom from above is .  meaning  do not be a perfectionist .  avoid setting unrealistically high standards for yourself or others .  be modest , set reasonable standards , and know both your limitations and those of others .  when you do this , you will reduce stress all around and even encourage greater success .  also , keep a sense of humor .  when you laugh  even when something goes wrong  you relieve tension and brighten your mood .  a discerning man will remain calm .  meaning  negative emotions can cloud clear thinking , so try to stay calm .  identify what stresses you , and note your response .  for example , when you feel stressed , note your thoughts , feelings , and behavior , perhaps even making a record of them .  by becoming more aware of your response to stress , you may be able to deal with it more effectively .  also , think of ways to eliminate stressful things from your life .  if that is unrealistic , look for ways to reduce their impact , perhaps by managing your tasks or time more efficiently .  try to see things in a different light .  what stresses you may not stress someone else .  the difference may be in viewpoint .  consider these three suggestions                 do not be quick to assume bad motives .  a person may cut ahead of you in a line .  if you attribute his act to rudeness , you may become upset .  instead , why not assume that his motive was good .  you may be right .  see the positive side of a situation .  a long wait at a doctor ' s office or an airport is easier to bear if you use the time to do some reading or to catch up on work or email .  keep the big picture in mind .  ask yourself ,  will this problem be a big issue tomorrow or next week .   '  distinguish between minor or short - term issues and more serious ones .  let all things take place decently and by arrangement .  meaning  try to maintain order in your life .  we like a reasonable amount of order in life .  one thing that can contribute to disorder  and stress  is procrastination , and this may lead to a growing list of unfinished tasks .  why not try these two suggestions .  make a practical schedule , and stick to it .  identify and correct any attitudes that cause you to procrastinate .  better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  meaning  workaholics can deprive themselves of the benefits of their  two handfuls of hard work .  they may have no time or energy left to enjoy what they worked for .  have a realistic view of work and money .  more money does not mean more happiness or less stress .  in fact , the opposite can be true .  so try to live within your means .  make time to relax .  you relieve stress when you do things you enjoy .  however , passive recreation , such as watching tv , may not help .  keep technology in its place .  avoid constantly checking email , texts , or social media sites .  unless circumstances require it , do not check work - related email outside of working hours .  physical training is beneficial .  meaning  regular exercise promotes better health .  develop healthful habits .  physical activity can lift your mood and improve your body ' s response to stress .  eat nutritious food , and try to avoid skipping meals .  be sure to get enough rest .  avoid harmful  solutions  to stress , such as smoking or drug and alcohol abuse .  in the long run , these heighten stress , perhaps by robbing you of your health and hard - earned money .  see your doctor if your stress becomes overwhelming .  getting professional help is not an admission of failure .  a kind man benefits himself , but the cruel person brings trouble on himself .  the book overcoming stress has a chapter entitled  kill your stress with kindness .  treating others kindly , according to the author , dr .  tim cantopher , can promote health and happiness .  on the other hand , an unkind or cruel person makes himself unhappy because he alienates himself from others .  we may also get stress relief by treating ourselves kindly .  for example , we should not make harsh or unrealistic demands on ourselves .  nor should we belittle or malign ourselves .  you must love your neighbor as yourself ,  jesus christ said .  make sure of the more important things .  meaning  carefully consider your priorities .  list your tasks in order of importance .  this will help you focus on the more important jobs , and it will reveal which ones you can put off , delegate , or even eliminate .  for a week , keep track of how you use your time .  then look for ways to make better use of it .  the more you are in control , the less pressured you will feel .  schedule some downtime .  even short breaks can reinvigorate you and reduce your stress .  anxiety in a man ' s heart weighs it down , but a good word cheers it up .  meaning  kind , compassionate words from others can lift your spirits .  talk things over with an understanding person .  a confidant may help you to see things differently or even to see a solution you overlooked .  and just unburdening yourself can make you feel better .  ask for help .  can you delegate a task or share the workload .  if a work associate stresses you , look for ways to improve the situation .  for example , could you kindly and tactfully tell the person how he or she makes you feel .  if such measures fail , can you reduce the time you spend with the person .  happy are those conscious of their spiritual need .  meaning  as humans , we need more than food , clothing , and shelter .  we have a spiritual need .  to be happy , we must be conscious of that need and attend to it .  prayer can be a big help .  god invites you to  throw all your anxiety on him , because he cares for you .  prayer and wholesome meditation can result in deep inner peace .  read spiritually uplifting things .  the principles discussed in this magazine come from the bible , which was written to satisfy our spiritual need .  these also foster  practical wisdom and thinking ability .  why not set a goal to read the bible .  the book of proverbs might be a good place to start .  the insight of a man certainly slows down his anger , and it is beauty on his part to overlook an offense .  in the journal of health psychology , loren toussaint states that  stress degrades  health  and forgiveness protects health .  he adds   forgiveness is the release of negative  and the potential enhancement of positive  feelings , emotions , and behaviors toward an offender .  he thus concludes that a forgiving spirit  may help minimize stress - related disorders .  so never be anxious about the next day , for the next day will have its own anxieties .  each day has enough of its own troubles .  but the wisdom from above is first of all pure , then peaceable , reasonable , ready to obey , full of mercy and good fruits , impartial , not hypocritical .  a man of knowledge restrains his words , and a discerning man will remain calm .   ,  cool of spirit .  but let all things take place decently and by arrangement .  better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  sweet is the sleep of the one serving , whether he eats little or much , but the plenty belonging to the rich one does not permit him to sleep .  for physical training is beneficial for a little , but godly devotion is beneficial for all things , as it holds promise of the life now and the life that is to come .  a kind man  benefits himself ,  but the cruel person brings trouble  on himself .  or  a man of loyal love .  or  does good to his soul .  or  disgrace .  the second is this ,  you must love your neighbor as yourself .   '  there is no other commandment greater than these .  that you may make sure of the more important things , so that you may be flawless and not stumbling others up to the day of christ       anxiety in a man ' s heart weighs it down ,  but a good word cheers it up .  or  depresses him .  a man of knowledge restrains his words , and a discerning man will remain calm .   ,  cool of spirit .  happy are those conscious of their spiritual need , since the kingdom of the heavens belongs to them .  while you throw all your anxiety  on him , because he cares for you .  or  cares  worries .  my son , do not lose sight of them .  safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability   evidently referring to god ' s qualities mentioned in the previous verses .  the insight of a man certainly slows down his anger , and it is beauty on his part to overlook  an offense .   ,  pass over .  or  a transgression . 
find relief from stress the wisdom in the bible can help us to avoid much needless stress .  we ourselves cannot eliminate all that stresses us .  but our creator can .  he has even appointed someone to come to our aid .  that one is jesus christ .  on a global scale , he will soon do even more wonderful things than he did when he was a man on earth .  for example  jesus will heal the sick , as he demonstrated .  they brought him all those who were suffering with various diseases .   , and he cured them .  jesus will provide housing and food for all .  they  christ ' s subjects  will build houses and live in them , and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage .  they will not build for someone else to inhabit , nor will they plant for others to eat .  jesus '  rule will result in global peace and security .  in his days the righteous will flourish , and peace will abound until the moon is no more .  he will have subjects from sea to sea and from the river to the ends of the earth .  his enemies will lick the dust .  jesus will eliminate injustice .  he will have pity on the lowly and the poor , and the lives of the poor he will save .  from oppression and from violence he will rescue them .  jesus will even eliminate suffering and death .  death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  the world is more stressed , worried , sad and in pain today than we ' ve ever seen it .  younis , gallup managing editor .  why is stress so common .  the bible gives a most reasonable answer .  perilous times of great stress and trouble .  the reason , the bible goes on to say , relates to the bad personality traits of people .  these traits include greed , arrogance , religious hypocrisy , a violent disposition , a lack of family affection , and a lack of self - control .  the last days will end when jesus christ takes full control of the earth as king of god ' s kingdom , a heavenly government .  and the report about him spread throughout all syria , and they brought him all those who were suffering with various diseases and torments , those who were demon - possessed and epileptic and paralyzed , and he cured them .  they will build houses and live in them , and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage .  for the days of my people will be like the days of a tree , and the work of their hands my chosen ones will enjoy to the full .  in his days the righteous will flourish ,  and peace will abound until the moon is no more .  or  will rule .  that is , the euphrates .  he will have pity on the lowly and the poor , and the lives  of the poor he will save .  or  redeem their souls .  and he will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  the former things have passed away .  but know this , that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here .  in the days of those kings the god of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed .  and this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people .  it will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms , and it alone will stand forever , . 
they reflect the timeless wisdom found in the bible .  if you would like to learn more , go to jw .  there you will find videos , animations , interviews , and articles on many helpful topics , including stress relief .  a sample is listed here   managing conflicts in marriage  how to keep peace with your relatives  how to let go of resentment  how to communicate with your teenager  when your teenage daughter is stressed out  how to teach teens internet safety  beat a bully without using your fists  how can i get more sleep .  why make peace with my siblings .  a calm heart gives life  to the body , but jealousy is rottenness to the bones . 
one day , my brother ' s girlfriend asked me for a ride home in our car .  i obliged and took my young son along .  but when i returned home , sarah was furious .  we started arguing , and right in front of my family , she called me a womanizer .  i lost my temper and started saying things that irritated her even more .  she says   our son has a serious health problem , and at the time , we had financial trouble .  so when fernando left in the car with his brother ' s girlfriend and our son , i was upset for several reasons .  when he came home , i let him know how i felt .  we had a huge argument and called each other names .  i felt terrible afterward .  if a couple argue , does this mean that they no longer love each other .  fernando and sarah , quoted above , love each other dearly .  yet , even in the best of marriages , there will occasionally be some conflict .  why do conflicts arise , and what can you do to prevent them from ruining your marriage .  since marriage is an arrangement designed by god , it makes sense to examine what his word , the bible , has to say on this subject .  understanding the challenges most married couples want to treat each other in a loving and kind manner .  however , the bible realistically notes that  all have sinned and fall short of the glory of god .  so when disagreements arise , emotions may be difficult to control .  and if an argument starts , some may find it a real struggle to resist bad habits , such as screaming and abusive speech .  what other factors might cause tension .  a husband and a wife often have different communication styles .  when we were first married ,  says michiko ,  i discovered that we had very different attitudes about discussing matters .  i like to talk about not only what happened but also why and how it happened .  my husband seems to be interested in just the end result .  michiko ' s dilemma is not unique .  in many marriages , one partner may want to discuss a disagreement at length , while the other dislikes confrontation and wants to avoid the subject .  sometimes , the more one partner pursues the matter , the more the other tries to avoid it .  have you noticed this pattern emerging in your marriage .  does one of you always seem to play the part of the discusser , and the other , the part of the avoider .  another factor to consider is that an individual ' s family background may influence his or her perception of how married couples should communicate .  justin , who has been married for five years , says   i come from a quiet family and find it difficult to talk openly about my feelings .  this frustrates my wife .  her family is very expressive , and she has no problem letting me know how she feels .  why work to resolve problems .  researchers have found that the most reliable indicator of how happy a marriage will be is not how often the couple say that they love each other .  sexual compatibility and financial security are not the most important factors either .  instead , the most dependable indicator of marital success is how well husband and wife manage any conflicts that arise .  in addition , jesus said that when a couple marry , it is not man but god who yokes them together .  therefore , a good marriage honors god .  on the other hand , if a husband fails to show love and consideration for his wife , jehovah god may ignore the man ' s prayers .  if a wife does not respect her husband , she is really disrespecting jehovah , who appointed the husband as head of the family .  keys to success  avoid damaging patterns of speech no matter what your communication style or family background , there are some damaging patterns of speech that must be avoided if you are to apply bible principles and manage conflicts effectively .  ask yourself the following questions     do i resist the urge to retaliate .   '   the squeezing of the nose is what brings forth blood , and the squeezing out of anger is what brings forth quarreling ,  states a wise proverb .  what does that mean .  consider this example .  what starts out as a difference over how to balance the family budget   may quickly mutate into an attack on each other ' s character .  true , if your mate  squeezes your nose '  by launching into an attack on your character , you may feel the urge to  squeeze '  right back .  however , retaliation only leads to anger and an escalation of the disagreement .  the bible writer james warned   look .  how little a fire it takes to set so great a woodland on fire .  well , the tongue is a fire .  when marriage mates fail to control their tongue , small disagreements can quickly flare into raging conflicts .  and marriages that are repeatedly ravaged by such emotional firestorms do not provide an environment in which love can grow .  instead of retaliating , can you imitate jesus , who when being reviled  did not go reviling in return .  the quickest way to take the heat out of a quarrel is to acknowledge your mate ' s viewpoint and to apologize for your part in the conflict .  try this  the next time a dispute arises , ask yourself   what would it cost me to acknowledge my mate ' s concerns .  what have i done that contributed to this problem .  what prevents me from apologizing for my mistakes .   '     do i minimize or belittle my spouse ' s feelings .   '   all of you be like - minded , showing fellow feeling ,  commands god ' s word .  consider two of the reasons why you might fail to apply this advice .  one is that you may lack insight into the mind , or the feelings , of your mate .  for example , if your spouse is more distraught over some issue than you are , you might tend to say ,  you ' re just overreacting .  your intention may be to help your mate see the problem in perspective .  however , few people are comforted by such comments .  both wives and husbands need to know that the people whom they love understand and empathize with them .  having undue pride might also prompt a person to belittle a mate ' s feelings .  a proud individual attempts to elevate himself by constantly putting others down .  he might do so by means of name - calling or negative comparisons .  consider the example of the pharisees and scribes of jesus '  day .  when anyone  even a fellow pharisee  expressed an opinion that differed from that of these proud individuals , they resorted to name - calling and derogatory remarks .  jesus was different .  he empathized with others when they expressed themselves to him .  think about how you react when your mate expresses his or her concerns .  do your words , tone of voice , and facial expressions convey empathy .  or do you tend quickly to dismiss your mate ' s feelings .  try this  over the coming weeks , notice how you speak to your spouse .  if you are dismissive or say something demeaning , apologize immediately .  do i often assume that my partner ' s motives are selfish .   '   is it for nothing that job has feared god .  have not you yourself put up a hedge about him and about his house and about everything that he has all around .  with those words , satan called into question the motives of the faithful man job .  if marriage mates are not careful , they may fall into a similar pattern .  for example , if your mate does something nice for you , do you wonder what he or she wants or is covering up .  if your mate makes a mistake , do you view this failing as confirmation that he or she is selfish and uncaring .  do you immediately recall similar mistakes from the past and add this one to the list .  try this  make a list of the positive things that your mate has done for you and the good motives that could have prompted these actions .  the apostle paul wrote   love .  does not keep account of the injury .  real love is not blind .  but neither does it keep score .  paul also stated that love  believes all things .  not that this kind of love is gullible , but it is open to trust .  it is not cynical , suspicious .  the type of love that the bible encourages is ready to forgive and is willing to give others the benefit of the doubt .  when mates display this kind of love for each other , they will enjoy a happy marriage .  ask yourself .  what mistakes did the couple quoted at the beginning of the article make .  how can i avoid making similar mistakes in my marriage .  which of the points mentioned in the article do i need to work on most .  footnote  names have been changed .  kindness , humility , mildness , and patience .  though you will always love and respect your parents , your mate is now the most important person on earth for you .  this may be difficult for some of your relatives to accept .  but bible principles can help you to find a balance , so that you can keep peace with your relatives as you work hard to build your new family relationship .  regardless of how old you are , you always need to honor and respect your parents .  recognize that your mate too , as a son or a daughter , needs to give attention to his or her parents .  love is not jealous ,  so never feel threatened by the relationship your mate has with them .  when you marry , your parents may feel that they are still responsible for you , and they may want to be more involved in your marriage than they should be .  it is up to you and your mate to agree on what boundaries you will set for them and then lovingly let them know .  you can be open and direct without being rude .  humility , mildness , and patience will help you build a warm relationship with your relatives and continue  putting up with one another in love .  they do not mean any harm with their involvement .  they genuinely care about you .  it can be difficult for your parents to view you and your mate as an independent family .  they may even feel abandoned .  but by following bible principles and by having open communication , you will still be able to honor your parents without compromising your marriage .  why is it natural for my mate ' s parents to be interested in our marriage .  how can i put my mate first and , at the same time , show respect for my parents .  as a result , the affection you once had has been replaced by resentment .  you have no choice , it seems , but to endure a loveless marriage .  you resent your spouse for that too .  be assured that things can improve .  first , though , consider a few facts about resentment .  what you should know resentment can destroy a marriage .  because it undermines the very qualities upon which a marriage should be built , including love , trust , and loyalty .  in a sense , then , resentment is not the result of a marital problem  it is a marital problem .  for good reason , the bible says   put away from yourselves every kind of malicious bitterness .  if you harbor resentment , you are hurting yourself .  harboring resentment is like slapping yourself and then expecting the other person to feel the pain .  the family member who is the focus of your resentment may be feeling just fine , enjoying life , and perhaps not at all troubled by any of this ,  writes mark sichel in his book healing from family rifts .  the bottom line .  resentment hurts you far more than the person you resent ,  sichel says .  resentment is a choice .  some people might doubt that .  they would say ,  my spouse made me resentful .   '  the problem is , such thinking puts the emphasis on something that cannot be controlled  the actions of another person .  the bible offers an alternative .  it says   let each one examine his own actions .  we cannot control what someone else says or does , but we can control how we react to it .  resentment is not the only option .  what you can do take responsibility for your resentment .  granted , it is easy to blame your spouse .  but remember , resentment is a choice .  so is forgiveness .  you can choose to follow the bible ' s admonition   do not let the sun set while you are still angry .  a spirit of forgiveness gives you an opportunity to approach your marriage problems with a better mind - set .  examine yourself honestly .  the bible acknowledges that some people are  prone to anger  and  disposed to rage .  does that describe you .  ask yourself   am i inclined toward bitterness .  how easily am i offended .  do i tend to make issues over minor matters .   '  the bible says that  the one who keeps harping on a matter separates close friends .  that can happen in a marriage as well .  so if you have a tendency toward resentment , ask yourself ,  could i be more patient with my spouse .  decide what is truly important .  the bible says that there is  a time to be silent and a time to speak .  not every offense needs to be discussed  sometimes you can simply  have your say in your heart , upon your bed , and keep silent .  when you do need to discuss a grievance , wait until your irritation has passed .  when i feel hurt ,  says a wife named beatriz ,  i try to calm down first .  sometimes i later realize that the wrong was not that serious anyway , and then i ' m more inclined to speak respectfully .  understand the meaning of  forgive .  in the bible , the word  forgive  is sometimes translated from an original - language word that suggests the idea of letting go of something .  therefore , to forgive does not require that you minimize the offense or act as if it never occurred  it could mean that you simply let it go , realizing that resentment can do more damage to your health and your marriage than the offense itself .  love covers a multitude of sins .  the insight of a man certainly slows down his anger , and it is beauty on his part to overlook an offense .  write them down at the end of the week , and tell your spouse why you appreciate those traits .  focusing on the positive will help you to fight off resentment .  as a teenager , he tells you nothing .  when you try to converse , he either gives clipped responses or ignites an argument that turns your home ground into a battleground .  you can learn to talk with your teenager .  first , though , consider two factors that may contribute to the challenge .  why it happens the quest for independence .  to become a responsible adult , your teenager must , in a figurative sense , gradually move from the passenger seat to the driver ' s seat and learn to navigate life ' s treacherous roadways .  of course , some teenagers want more freedom than they should have  on the other hand , some parents grant less freedom than they could .  the tug - of - war that may result can create considerable turmoil for parents and teens .  abstract thinking .  young children tend to think in concrete , black - and - white terms , but many teenagers can perceive the gray areas of a matter .  this is an important aspect of abstract thinking , and it helps a young person develop sound judgment .  consider an example  to a child the concept of fairness seems simple   mom broke a cookie in two and gave half to me and half to my brother .   '  in this case , fairness is reduced to a mathematical formula .  teenagers , however , realize that the concept is not that simple .  after all , fair treatment is not always equal , and equal treatment is not always fair .  abstract thinking allows your teenager to grapple with such complex issues .  the downside .  it can also cause him to grapple with you .  what you can do when possible , have casual chats .  take advantage of informal moments .  for example , some parents have found that teenagers are more apt to open up while doing chores or while riding in the car , when they are side - by - side with a parent rather than face - to - face .  keep it brief .  you do not have to argue every issue to the bitter end .  instead , make your point .  and then stop .  most of your message will be  heard  by your teenager later , when he ' s alone and can ponder over what you ' ve said .  give him a chance to do so .  listen  and be flexible .  listen carefully  without interrupting  so that you can get the full scope of the problem .  when replying , be reasonable .  if you rigidly adhere to rules , your teen will be tempted to look for loopholes .  this is when kids live two lives ,  warns the book staying connected to your teenager .  the one in which they tell their parents what they want to hear and the one in which they do as they please once they are out of their parents '  sight .  when we disagree , my mom takes offense at everything i say ,  says a teen named kari .  that just makes me upset , and the conversation snowballs into an argument .  rather than overreact , say something that  mirrors  your teen ' s feelings .  for example , instead of saying ,  that ' s nothing to worry about .  say ,  i can see how much this bothers you .  to the extent possible , guide , don ' t dictate .  your teen ' s abstract thinking skills are like muscles that need to be developed .  so when he faces a dilemma , do not do his  exercising  for him .  as you discuss the matter , give him a chance to come up with some solutions of his own .  then , after you have brainstormed a few options , you could say   those are a few possibilities .  think them over for a day or two , and then we can get together again to talk about which solution you prefer and why .  footnotes  although in this article we refer to the teenager as a male , the principles discussed apply to both genders .  names in this article have been changed .  an answer , when mild , turns away rage .  do not irritate your children , but bring them up tenderly with true christian training and advice .  do you wish that they really understood you .  you can make it easier for them to do both .  be willing to tell them what ' s going on in your life .  talk openly .  when you hold back , they cannot fully trust you  and trust is the key to your getting more freedom .  the point is , do not leave all the communication up to your parents .  do your part .  tell your parents about your day .  ask them about theirs .  if you have a complaint , learn how to express it respectfully .  communication is a skill that you will need in adulthood .  why not acquire it now .   '  you ask yourself in disbelief .  she ' s too young to know what stress is .   '  before you tell your daughter that , however , consider some reasons why life might seem overwhelming to a young teenage girl .  why it happens physical changes .  the growth spurt of puberty can cause a girl considerable anxiety , especially if she is behind  or ahead of  her peers .  compared with my peers , i felt that i was weird , as if i were a mutant .  emotional changes .  i didn ' t know what was wrong with me .  it was as if my emotions were out of control .  onset of the menstrual cycle .  even though my mom prepared me , my first period totally caught me off guard ,  says a young woman named kathleen .  i took several showers a day because i felt dirty all the time .  plus , my three older brothers would tease me mercilessly .  they somehow thought that my whole ordeal of getting periods was funny .  social pressure .  kids in my school were mean to anyone who stood out as different .  what you can do encourage your daughter to talk about her stress .  at first , she may be reluctant to talk .  but be patient and follow the bible ' s advice to  be quick to listen , slow to speak .  take your daughter ' s stresses seriously .  remember , she does not have your experience in life , and therefore she has little with which to compare her stresses  much less develop the skills to address them .  do not burden your daughter with too many extracurricular activities .  according to the book teach your children well , youths whose schedules are overly crammed  often show signs of stress , particularly physical signs like headaches and stomachaches .  make sure your daughter gets enough rest .  sleep is often the first thing teenagers neglect .  without it , however , your daughter ' s thinking skills will be weakened and so will her ability to ward off stress .  help your daughter find healthy outlets for stress .  for some girls , exercise reduces anxiety .  physical training is beneficial ,  acknowledges the bible .  other girls find that keeping a journal helps them put their stress in perspective .  that helped me to understand how i really felt about a problem , and then it would be easier either to resolve it or just let it go .  set the example .  how do you cope with stress .  do you take on more than you can handle and then panic when getting things done .  do you burn yourself out working too hard , not taking time for the more important things of life .  remember , your teenager is watching your example and learning from it  for better or for worse .  footnote  names in this article have been changed .  who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of those not strong .  make sure of the more important things .  better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  when a problem arises , his first response is usually  how can we fix this .   '  or  what ' s the best solution to this problem .   '  my dad isn ' t perfect  he does get stressed - out at times .  but he never lets a problem defeat him .  he ' s a good role model for me in handling stress .  you are concerned for good reason  your teenager is often online and seems oblivious to the dangers .  you can teach your teenager internet safety .  first , though , consider some things you should know about life online .  what you should know teens can access the internet on mobile devices .  the rule that the computer should be placed in a common area of the house still has merit .  but with a tablet or smartphone connected to the internet , your teenager may have more access to the online world than ever  and without your supervision .  some teens spend excessive time online .  i need a lot of self - control .  teens might reveal online more than they should .  shady people can piece together a teenager ' s online comments and photos to find out such information as where he or she lives and goes to school and at what times no one in the family will be at home .  some teens do not understand the repercussions of what they post .  what is posted online stays online .  sometimes embarrassing comments and photos are discovered later  for example , by a prospective employer doing a background check on a job applicant .  despite such concerns , remember this  the internet is not your enemy .  rather , what leads to trouble is unwise use of the internet .  what you can do teach your teen priorities and time - management skills .  part of becoming a responsible adult involves learning to put first things first .  family communication , homework , and chores are more important than casual internet use .  if the amount of time your teen spends online is a concern , set limits  even using a timer if necessary .  teach your teen to think before posting .  help your teenager to ask such questions as  could the comment i am about to post hurt someone .  how will this photo affect my reputation .  would i feel embarrassed if my parents or other adults saw this photo or comment .  what would they conclude about me if they saw it .  what would i think of someone who posted such a comment or photo .  teach your teen to live by values  not just rules .  you cannot look over your teenager ' s shoulder every moment of the day .  besides , your goal as a parent is not to control your children but to help them  have their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong .  so , instead of emphasizing rules and punishment as the primary factor , appeal to your teenager ' s moral sense .  what type of reputation does he want to have .  for what type of character traits does she want to be known .  your goal is to help your teenager make wise decisions , whether you are there or not .  navigating the internet , like driving a car , requires good judgment  not just technological ability .  your guidance as a parent , therefore , is crucial .  after all , it is as internet - safety expert parry aftab observes   kids know more about technology .  parents know more about life .  engaging in shameful conduct is like a game to the stupid one , but wisdom is for the man of discernment .  safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability .  letting go with love and confidence , by kenneth ginsburg and susan fitz gerald .  the same principle applies to the use of the internet .  young people ask how can i get more sleep .  if you ' re failing math , you might think that you just need to study harder .  if you ' re not performing your best at sports , you might think you just need to practice more .  but in both cases what you really might need is more sleep .  consider why .  why do you need sleep .  what is keeping you up .  how can you get more sleep .  what your peers say why do you need sleep .  experts say that most teenagers need between eight and ten hours of sleep a night .  why is it important that you get enough sleep .  sleep sharpens your mental skills .  sleep has been called  food for the brain .  it can help you improve at school , at sports , and in your problem - solving skills .  sleep improves your attitude and mood .  sleep - deprived people are more likely to experience mood swings , feel sad or depressed , and have problems getting along with others .  sleep makes you a safer driver .  sleep promotes better health .  sleep helps your body maintain and repair its cells , tissues , and blood vessels .  quality sleep can also lower your risk of obesity , diabetes , and stroke .  what is keeping you up .  despite the benefits we have mentioned , many teenagers aren ' t getting the sleep they need .  what obstacles can get in the way of your sleep .  social life .  it ' s too easy to stay up late and waste time , especially on nights when i go out with friends .  responsibilities .  i love sleep , but it ' s hard to get enough with such a busy schedule .  my phone is a big reason i neglect my sleep .  it ' s hard to resist looking at it when i ' m in bed .  how can you get more sleep .  check your viewpoint about sleep .  the bible says   better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  sleep is a necessity , not a luxury .  without it , the quality of your work and even the quality of your fun will plummet .  identify your biggest obstacle to sleep .  for example , do you stay out late with friends .  do you feel overloaded with homework and chores .  does your cell phone keep you up past your bedtime or wake you up after you ' ve gone to sleep .  to think about  overcoming your biggest obstacle will take some work , but the results will be worth it .  of course , what works for one person may not work for another .  for example , some say that a short nap during the day helps them sleep better at night .  but others say that daytime napping has the opposite effect .  find out what works best for you .  the following suggestions can help    give yourself time to wind down .  if you start relaxing before it ' s time to go to bed , you will likely fall asleep more quickly .  it ' s good to finish chores and other responsibilities early so that you ' re not worrying about them at bedtime .  be proactive .  rather than allow your circumstances to control you , take control of your schedule so that you get the sleep you need .  i need at least eight hours of sleep each night .  so if i have to be up earlier than usual , i calculate backwards to see what time i need to go to bed .  strive for consistency .  your body ' s internal clock will work for you , but only if you train it .  experts suggest that you go to bed and wake up at the same times each day .  try it for a month , and see how much better you feel .  if you go to sleep at the same time each night , your mind will be refreshed the next day .  this will help you to be more effective in any activity that you perform .  be reasonable with your social life .  the bible says to be  moderate in habits ,  and that includes what you do in your leisure time .  i ' ve had to learn to limit my social activities in the evenings .  if i don ' t set a time limit for recreation , something is going to suffer , and it ' s usually my sleep .  let your phone  sleep  too .  for at least an hour before bedtime , resist the urge to browse the internet or send late - night texts to your friends .  in fact , some experts warn that the type of light that comes from a phone , a tv , or a tablet can make it harder for you to get to sleep .  but to be fully rested , you need to put your phone away .  what your peers say  establish a routine , and stick to it .  if you have a set time that you regularly go to sleep , your body will naturally learn to follow that schedule .  get into the habit of going to bed at a reasonable time each night .  sleep allows your body to repair itself and helps you to be more prepared and alert for the next day .  it ' s hard to be the first person to leave a gathering because you know you have to get up early the next morning .  but being modest is part of becoming a mature person .  young people ask why make peace with my siblings .  the best worst friends  two reasons to make peace what your peers say  the best worst friends  siblings have been called  the best worst friends you ' ll ever have .  you love them , and they love you  but sometimes you just can ' t seem to get along .  he knows exactly which buttons to push and when to push them to get the biggest rise out of me .  some sibling conflicts can be solved with simple communication and negotiation skills .  for example    two brothers who share a room might argue over privacy .  the solution .  learn to compromise and allow each other needed space .  two sisters might  borrow  each other ' s clothing items without asking .  the solution .  talk it out and set reasonable boundaries .  in some cases , problems between siblings are more serious and can have severe consequences .  consider two examples from the bible    miriam and aaron were jealous of their brother , moses , with tragic results .  then ask yourself   how can i keep from being jealous of my sibling .   '    cain ' s anger grew to the point that he murdered his brother abel .  then ask yourself   how can i control my anger when dealing with my brother or sister .   '  two reasons to make peace no matter how hard it is to get along with your siblings , there are at least two reasons why it ' s worth the effort .  it ' s a sign of maturity .  i used to have a short fuse with my two younger sisters ,  says a young man named alex .  now i ' m much more calm and patient with them .  you could say i ' ve grown up .  the bible says   the one who is slow to anger has great discernment , but the impatient one displays his foolishness .  it ' s good training for the future .  if you can ' t tolerate the imperfections of your siblings , how will you deal with a spouse , a workmate , an employer , or anyone else you have to interact with .  fact of life  the success of your future relationships will depend on your ability to communicate and negotiate , and there ' s no better place to cultivate such skills than within your family .  the bible says   as far as it depends on you , be peaceable .  would you like help in resolving problems with a sibling .  read  what your peers say ,  and then check out the accompanying worksheet ,  getting along with siblings .  what your peers say  i have three sisters , and i can say that maintaining a good relationship with them isn ' t always easy .  at the same time , i ' ve come to realize that these are the people who know me best and who will always be there for me .  there are times when i get on my brother ' s nerves or he gets on mine .  but i do love my brother .  he has always been the kind of person who builds up my confidence .  i admire his determination  he doesn ' t give up , and he always goes the extra mile .  i like to be around people , so having two little brothers is nice .  because they ' re boys , being around them has taught me a lot about how to treat those who aren ' t like me .  i ' m really fortunate to have such great brothers . 
