it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit donate .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures . 
is technology your master or your servant .  many would say that they control their devices , not the other way around .  but technology can affect people subtly in ways they do not realize  even in ways they do not want . 
how does technology affect . 
thanks to texting , email , videoconferencing , and social media , two people can communicate easily , even when they live continents apart .  for them , technology is a useful servant .  however , some people who primarily use technology to maintain friendships tend to .  show less empathy for their friends .  feel more lonely and empty .  focus more on self than on others .  empathy requires that we slow down and patiently consider another person  something that may seem difficult to achieve with an overload of social media posts and rapid - fire texting .  in time , if technology is controlling you , responding to your friends '  messages can seem like another chore on your to - do list .  your goal becomes to clear out your in - box rather than to help a friend in need .  to think about  how can you maintain  fellow feeling  when you use technology to communicate with friends .  one study found that many people felt worse after browsing through a popular social media platform .  the researchers concluded that looking at the pictures and updates of others can leave a person with  a feeling of not having done anything meaningful .  furthermore , looking at the exciting photos others have posted can lead to negative comparisons .  after all , it may seem as if everyone else were having a good time , while your own life is in a rut .  to think about  when using social media , how can you avoid negatively comparing yourself with others .  one teacher notes that some of her students seem inclined toward one - sided friendships in which their greatest concern is ,  who has my back .  such friendships focus merely on what one gets out of the relationship .  a person could start to view his friends as apps that can be used and shut off as needed .  to think about  does what you post online show that you may have the tendency to be competitive or to focus too much on yourself .  when technology is your servant rather than your master , it will help you keep in touch with your friends and even draw closer to them .  bible principle   love .  does not look for its own interests .  note the suggestions you would like to implement , or write down your own ideas .  have more in - person conversations     put away   the phone when conversing with others   cut back on the time spent scrolling through social media   become a better listener   contact a friend who is going through a hard time   par .  do i have genuine friendships with people i care about and who care about me .  how often does a phone call , text , or notification interrupt an in - person conversation i am having with a friend .  could the photos and comments that i post on social media give the impression that i am focusing on myself .  how do i feel after a period of browsing through social media .  what adjustments could i make so that my use of technology does not prevent me from making true friends .  bible principle   look out not only for your own interests , but also for the interests of others .  friendships take time and effort , so realistically you may only have a few .  it ' s not about numbers but about quality .  true friends look out for your best interests , and you look out for theirs .  emily     finally , all of you have unity of mind ,  fellow feeling , brotherly affection , tender compassion , and humility .  or  think in agreement .  but let each one examine his own actions , and then he will have cause for rejoicing in regard to himself alone , and not in comparison with the other person .  let us not become egotistical , stirring up competition with one another , envying one another .  love is patient and kind .  love is not jealous .  it does not keep account of the injury .  as you look out not only for your own interests , but also for the interests of others . 
children are so proficient at using technology that they are commonly called  digital natives ,  while adults who are less adept at using technology are referred to as  digital immigrants .  at the same time , some have noted that young people who spend a lot of time online tend to .  develop a dependency on their devices .  become involved in cyberbullying .  be exposed to pornography , whether or not by choice .  some online activities  gaming , for example  tend to be highly addictive .  that is no accident .  the apps on our phones are designed to keep us at our phones ,  says the book reclaiming conversation .  the longer we stare at commercial apps on our screens , the more profitable we become to advertisers .  to think about  do your children seem overly attached to their devices .  how can you help them make better use of their time .  when online , some people become more aggressive , vulgar , and insensitive to others '  feelings  traits that can lead to bullying .  some misuses of social media can be related to a person ' s inordinate desire to be liked or followed .  or if a person finds out he was not included in some way  for example , he sees he was not invited to a party  this could make him feel as if he were being bullied .  to think about  do your children use proper manners online .  how well do they deal with feeling excluded .  the internet has made lewd content easily available and accessible .  parents should realize that while filters can help , they are not foolproof .  sexting  sending or receiving explicit personal images , usually via smartphone  can have legal consequences .  in some cases , depending on local laws and the ages of those involved , people who sext can be charged with spreading child pornography .  to think about  how can you help your children resist the temptation to view or send sexually explicit images online .  although  digital natives  may use technology with remarkable ease , they still need guidance .  the book indistractable notes that giving children a smartphone or other device before they have the skills to use it properly is  just as irresponsible as letting them jump headfirst into a pool without knowing how to swim .  bible principle   train a child in the way he should go  even when he grows old he will not depart from it .  note the suggestions you would like to implement , or write down your own ideas .  discuss proper online conduct and manners with my child   help my child deal with feelings of exclusion   block inappropriate content to the extent possible   check my child ' s phone periodically   set a time limit for daily usage   prohibit devices in my child ' s bedroom overnight   ban devices at the dinner table   do we use a digital device as a babysitter to keep our child occupied .  does our child need a device with internet access .  can we afford to give our child a device with internet access .  how has our child already demonstrated self - control .  how has our child demonstrated responsibility for his or her actions .  what rules will we put in place .  how can we help our child balance screen time with other activities .  bible principle   mature people .  have their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong .  why do your children want a phone .  how do they use yours .  what sites do they go to .  what games do they play .  how long do they use it .  test your children ' s maturity and self - control before giving them a device .  put away from yourselves every kind of malicious bitterness , anger , wrath , screaming , and abusive speech , as well as everything injurious .  train a boy  in the way he should go  even when he grows old he will not depart from it .  or  child  youth .  but solid food belongs to mature people , to those who through use have their powers of discernment  trained to distinguish both right and wrong .  or  their perceptive powers . 
when used properly , technology can strengthen the relationship between a husband and wife .  for example , it can help a couple stay in touch throughout the day .  however , some spouses allow misuse of technology to .  rob them of valuable time together .  bring work into the home unnecessarily .  create distrust and even disloyalty .  a husband named michael says   sometimes when my wife and i are together , she isn ' t really  there .   '  she ' s busy looking at her phone , and she says ,  i haven ' t been able to check until now .   '   a husband named jonathan says that in such situations  spouses can be physically together and yet seem miles apart .  to think about  how often does a phone call , text , or notification interfere with quality time that could be spent with your spouse .  some people have to be available around the clock because of the nature of their secular work .  others , whose jobs are not so demanding , still find it difficult to leave their job behind them at the end of the day .  it ' s hard not to check every phone call or text message that i receive for work during time that i ' ve set aside to spend with my wife ,  admits a husband named lee .  a wife named joy says   i work from home , so work is always present .  it takes effort to be balanced .  to think about  do you give undivided attention to your spouse when he or she is speaking to you .  one poll found that suspicious use of social media was a common cause of marital fights .  ten percent of those surveyed admitted posting material online that they keep hidden from their spouse .  for good reason , social media has been called a  marriage minefield  and even  an adultery service .  not surprisingly , divorce lawyers say that social media plays a significant role in many of today ' s marriage breakups .  to think about  do you hide from your spouse communications with someone of the opposite sex .  a person who neglects eating will not stay healthy .  similarly , a person who neglects spending time with his or her spouse will find it difficult to maintain a healthy marriage .  bible principle   make sure of the more important things .  discuss which suggestions below you would like to implement , or write down your own ideas for keeping technology from interfering with your marriage .  in what ways can you use technology to strengthen your marriage .  in your opinion , to what extent does technology interfere with your time together .  what improvements would you like to see .  how difficult is it for you to leave work at work .  would your spouse agree with your answer .  how can you show reasonableness when it comes to the time and attention that you expect from your spouse .  bible principle   let each one keep seeking , not his own advantage , but that of the other person .  i work from home , so i try to stop work at a set time .  i also turn off email notifications after a certain hour so that i can use my phone for things like checking the time without being distracted by work .  jason , with his wife , alexandra     nevertheless , each one of you must love his wife as he does himself  on the other hand , the wife should have deep respect for her husband .  therefore , pay attention to how you listen , for whoever has will be given more , but whoever does not have , even what he imagines he has will be taken away from him .  above all the things that you guard , safeguard your heart , for out of it are the sources of life .  in the same way husbands should love their wives as their own bodies . 
people are constantly learning  whether for school , for work , or for other reasons .  technology can help .  never in history has it been so easy to access so much information , without having to leave your home or even get up from your chair .  however , many who make extensive use of technology find that they .  have difficulty concentrating while reading .  have trouble focusing on one task at a time .  become quickly bored in moments of solitude .  some browse and scan material instead of patiently following an author ' s train of thought .  skim - reading is fine when you need to find a quick answer to a question .  however , it can hinder comprehension when you need to consider a subject more deeply .  to think about  how well are you able to read long passages of text .  how can doing so improve your learning .  some people assume that technology gives them the ability to perform two tasks at a time  for example , to text friends while studying .  but when their attention is divided , they may not perform either task well , especially when both require concentration .  focus requires self - discipline , but it is well worth the effort .  you make fewer mistakes and have less stress ,  says a teenager named grace .  i ' ve learned that it ' s better to concentrate on one thing at a time and avoid the distraction of multitasking .  to think about  does multitasking interfere with your ability to comprehend and remember what you study .  some people become uneasy when they are alone in quiet surroundings , and they turn to technology to fill the void .  however , periods of solitude provide a valuable opportunity for deep thinking  an essential part of learning , not only for young people but also for adults .  to think about  are you able to use periods of solitude to your advantage .  in what ways could you use technology to enhance your thinking skills .  what uses could interfere with your ability to concentrate and learn .  bible principle   safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability .  do i have trouble concentrating when reading a long section of text on a screen .  if so , what most often is likely to distract me .  what steps can i take to reduce or even eliminate those distractions .  tip  start small by reading brief sections of text at first and then gradually increasing the amount .  read out loud , softly , to keep focused on the material .  what adjustments can i make so that i have adequate time to think and reflect on what i have read .  tip  use the last ten minutes of a study period to review what you have learned .  in what circumstances am i likely to try to multitask .  what adjustments could i make so that i focus on one task at a time .  tip  keep your study area clear of distractions so that you are not tempted to multitask .  bible principle   acquire wisdom , acquire understanding .  the heart of the understanding one acquires knowledge , and the ear of the wise seeks to find knowledge .  wisdom is directly in front of the discerning person , but the eyes of the stupid wander to the ends of the earth .  ponder over  these things  be absorbed in them , so that your advancement may be plainly seen by all people .  or  meditate on .  my son , do not lose sight of them .  safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability   evidently referring to god ' s qualities mentioned in the previous verses .  acquire wisdom , acquire understanding .  do not forget , and do not turn aside from what i say . 
which topic would you like to explore .  see the article  how to keep technology in its place .  see the article  teaching children smartphone sense .  see the cover series  what does the future hold .  the bible can help you and your family to get the best out of life now and gain a real hope for the future .  also available on jw .  org  online bible study lessons .  no registration required . 
technology can affect people subtly in ways they do not realize  even in ways they do not want .  your friendships .  your children .  your marriage .  your thinking . 
how is it affecting your marriage .  what you should know what you can do what couples say discussion guide what you should know   the wise use of technology can benefit a marriage .  for example , some husbands and wives use it to keep in touch with each other during the day while they are apart .  a simple text message that says  i love you '  or  i ' m thinking about you '  can mean a lot .  the unwise use of technology can undermine a marriage .  for example , some people use their devices constantly , which diminishes the time and attention they can give to their spouse .  i ' m sure that there have been times when my husband would have felt more inclined to talk to me if i hadn ' t been using my phone .  some people say they can have meaningful discussions with their spouse and use their device at the same time .  according to sociologist sherry turkle , that is  the myth of multitasking .  evidently , the so - called ability to multitask is not exactly a virtue .  she says that in reality ,  our performance degrades for each new task we add to the mix .  having a conversation with my husband is rewarding , but not when he ' s multitasking .  multitasking sends the message that he would be just as happy to be with his device only .  the bottom line  the way you use technology can help or can hurt your marriage .  what you can do establish priorities .  the bible says   make sure of the more important things .  ask yourself ,  does the time and attention that my spouse and i give to our devices rob us of the time and attention that we should give to each other .   '   it ' s sad to see a man and a woman using their phones while dining at a restaurant two people stuck to their devices .  we don ' t want to be enslaved to technology and forget what is most important our relationship with each other .  the bible says   keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons , making the best use of your time .  ask yourself ,  could i set aside a specific time to read and respond to nonemergency messages instead of impulsively handling all messages as they arrive .   '   i ' ve found it helpful to put my phone on silent mode and then respond to messages at a more convenient time .  it ' s rare that an incoming call , a text message , or an e - mail is a dire emergency that needs an immediate response .  if possible , leave work at work .  the bible says   there is an appointed time for everything .  ask yourself these questions   is my job invading the privacy of my home by means of my smartphone .  if so , how is this affecting my marriage .  what would my spouse say .   '   because of technology , we have the ability to work at any and all times .  i have had to make a special effort to avoid constantly checking my phone and handling work - related issues when my wife and i are together .  discuss the use of technology with your spouse .  the bible says   let each one keep seeking , not his own advantage , but that of the other person .  talk to your spouse about how each of you uses technology and what changes , if any , should be made .  you can use the discussion guide in this article to get started .  my husband and i are very honest with each other , and we speak up if we feel that the other one is using the phone or tablet too much .  we both recognize that this can be a problem , so we give careful consideration to each other ' s viewpoint .  the bottom line  make sure that technology is your servant , not your master .  what couples say  time in the evening that could be spent talking about our day could be spoiled if we constantly have our eyes on our phones .  we have so many legitimate demands in life as it is that we don ' t need to forfeit quality time with our mate for screen time .  trista , with her husband , georgel .  your spouse deserves your full attention .  there will always be a text message , an e - mail , or a news alert to check .  but it can almost always wait .  if you wouldn ' t text while driving because it could cause harm , why use your device in a way that could harm your marriage .  jonathan , with his wife , katelyn .  discussion guide first , each of you can consider the following questions separately .  then , discuss your answers with each other .  in what ways , if any , has your use of technology enhanced the quality of your marriage relationship .  do you feel that your spouse ' s use of technology creates difficulties in the marriage relationship .  do you think your spouse would say that your use of technology creates difficulties in the marriage relationship .  are there reasons why you always need to be available to receive and respond to messages .  if so , how can any difficulty that this presents be resolved .  what changes , if any , would you or your spouse like to see with regard to technology use .  review  how to keep technology in its place establish priorities .  do not forget what is most important your marriage .  could you set aside a specific time to handle messages instead of impulsively handling them as they arrive .  if possible , leave work at work .  does the fact that you can be available around the clock mean that you have to be .  discuss technology use with your spouse .  how does use of technology affect your relationship .  what changes , if any , should be made .  footnotes  from the book reclaiming conversation the power of talk in a digital age .  how can you teach your children to show good judgment with this powerful device .  for example , how much screen time is too much .  what you should know what you can do  a loving parent sets rules  what you should know   the smartphone exposes the user to danger .  the smartphone provides access to everything the internet has to offer , both good and bad .  it ' s easy to forget that a smartphone can expose our children to all sorts of dangerous people and ideas .  children need guidance .  young people were born into the culture of technology , whereas many adults are relative newcomers to it .  however , this doesn ' t mean that parents are technologically incompetent and that kids are better qualified to decide how and when to use their smartphones .  granted , your children might be more adept than you are at navigating a smartphone , but do not confuse ability with maturity .  even tech - savvy children need parental guidance when it comes to the responsible use of a smartphone .  giving your child a smartphone without training is like giving him the keys to a car , sitting him in the driver ' s seat , starting the engine , and saying  please be careful '  without first giving him driving lessons .  what you can do   learn the features of your child ' s phone .  become familiar with the tools that can help your child use the phone responsibly .  for example  what parental controls does the phone have to limit usage .  do you know that phone settings that block inappropriate content are not foolproof .  the more you know about your child ' s smartphone , the better prepared you will be to help him use it responsibly .  bible principle   with knowledge a man increases his power .  set boundaries .  decide what you will and will not allow .  for example  will you allow your child to bring the phone to the dinner table or to use it while visiting with family or friends .  should your children have their phone in the bedroom overnight .  what apps will you allow .  how much screen time is too much .  will you set a time limit on daily usage .  make your rules known , and be prepared to enforce disciplinary measures if the rules are broken .  bible principle   do not hold back discipline from a youth .  know your child ' s password , and check the contents of his or her phone as needed , including text messages , apps , pictures , and sites visited .  we told our daughter that we might make periodic unannounced checks on her phone .  her phone privileges were subject to change if she was irresponsible with it .  as a parent , you have every right to know how your child ' s smartphone is being used .  bible principle   a child is known by his actions , whether his behavior is pure and right .  teach values .  help your child want to do what is right .  why is that important .  because a determined child may try to work around a parent ' s best efforts at monitoring .  therefore , train your child to have virtuous qualities such as honesty , self - control , and a sense of responsibility for his or her actions .  a child who has moral values is more likely to use a phone wisely .  bible principle   mature people .  have their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong .  footnotes  in this article , the term  smartphone  refers to a cell phone that can access the internet .  essentially , it is a minicomputer .  for example , some use a  ghost app  that appears innocent like a calculator , for example to hide content that they do not want their parents to see .  box   a loving parent sets rules   unlimited smartphone access can expose our children to the very things we want to protect them from foul language , explicit images , and harmful people .  loving parents set rules to teach and protect their children , even though it may be difficult to be firm and consistent .  melissa , with her husband , wayne .  box  review  teaching children smartphone sense   learn the features of your child ' s phone .  become familiar with the tools that limit usage and block inappropriate content .  set boundaries .  make your rules known , and be prepared to enforce consequences if they are broken .  know your child ' s password , and make periodic checks as needed on how his or her phone is being used .  teach values .  help your child want to do what is right .  a child with moral values is more likely to use a phone wisely . 
