are you doing too much .  
are you doing too much . 
it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit www .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures . 
the brilliant blue of the pollia berry . 
today , many people are extremely busy , to the point that sometimes relationships are strained and families suffer .  how can we be balanced in our use of time .  a wise man once wrote   better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  this issue of awake .  provides practical suggestions on making wise use of our time , which includes setting practical priorities .  better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind . 
cover subject do you feel you are too busy .  if so , you are by no means alone .  everybody , everywhere seems to be busy ,  reports the magazine the economist .  causes included increased responsibilities at work or at home , rising expenses , and longer working hours .  children too can be affected if overloaded with tightly scheduled activities .  when we constantly try to do more than time may allow , we can become stressed  victims of what has been termed  time pressure .  but is it possible to live a more balanced life .  what role do our beliefs , choices , and goals play .  first , consider four reasons why some try to do too much .  i was involved in my work seven days a week ,  says a father named gary .  i did it because there was always something better that i wanted to give my kids .  i wanted them to have the things i never had .  despite their good motives , parents need to examine their priorities .  some studies suggest that both adults and children who attach a lot of importance to money and material possessions tend to be less happy , less satisfied with life , and less healthy physically than those who are not materialistic .  children who are raised with an emphasis on material things are actually less happy in an effort to position their children for future success , some parents overschedule both their children and themselves with various activities .  such well - meaning parents , says the book putting family first ,  are acting like recreation directors on a turbo - charged family cruise ship .  advertisers try to convince us that we are depriving ourselves if we don ' t buy their latest products .  says the economist   the explosion of available goods has only made time feel more crunched ,  as consumers  struggle to choose what to buy or watch or eat  in the limited time they have available .  how wrong he was .  instead of quitting  work  early ,  observed elizabeth kolbert , staff writer for the new yorker magazine , people  find new things to need   and these things cost money and time .  some employees work grueling hours to avoid displeasing their employer .  coworkers can also exert pressure by making others feel guilty if they do not stay late .  and then there is economic uncertainty , which can make people more willing to work longer hours or to be constantly on call .  similarly , parents can feel pressured to conform to the hectic pace of other families .  if they do not conform , they may feel guilty about  depriving  their children .  tim , who lives in the united states , says   i loved my work , and i worked at full throttle all the time .  i felt that i had to prove myself .  like tim , many feel a strong connection between their self - image and their pace of life .  busyness has acquired social status ,  says elizabeth kolbert , quoted earlier .  she adds   the busier you are the more important you seem .  diligence and hard work are encouraged in the bible .  but so is balance .  leading a balanced life is good for our mental and physical health .  is it really possible , though , to cut back or slow down .  consider four suggestions  it is normal to want a measure of financial security .  but how much money is enough .  what constitutes success .  is it measured merely by income or material assets .  conversely , having too much rest or recreation can also increase time pressure .  tim , quoted earlier , says   my wife and i took a hard look at our life and decided to simplify it .  we made a chart that showed our current situation and our new goals .  we discussed the effects of past decisions and what we would need to do to reach our goals .  the bible advises us to control  the desire of the eyes .  advertising can fuel such desires , pushing a person to work long hours or to indulge in excessive or costly recreation .  true , you may not be able to avoid all ads .  but you can limit your exposure to them .  you can also carefully consider what you actually need .  keep in mind , too , the power that your associates can have on you .  if they avidly pursue material things or if they measure success in material terms , you may be wise to seek out friends who have better priorities .  the one walking with the wise will become wise ,  the bible says .  speak to your employer about your work and your priorities .  and do not feel guilty about having a life away from your job .  the book work to live says   those who put up boundaries between the job and home or take vacations find one consistent revelation  there is no apocalypse while you ' re gone .  gary , quoted earlier , was financially comfortable , so he decided to reduce his working hours .  i talked with my family and suggested that we simplify our lifestyle ,  he said .  then we gradually took steps to do so .  i also approached my employer with a proposal to work fewer days each week , and he agreed .  husbands and wives need to spend time together , and children need time with their parents .  so avoid trying to match the pace of other families who are constantly on the go .  declare some downtime ,  gary suggests ,  and drop things that have a lower priority .  when your family is together , do not let television , cell phones , or other devices isolate you from one another .  share at least one meal together each day , and use mealtimes to talk as a family .  when parents heed that simple advice , their children enjoy greater well - being and do better at school .  use mealtimes to talk as a family in conclusion , ask yourself   what do i want out of life .  what do i want for my family .   '  if you desire a happier and more meaningful life , set priorities that reflect the proven wisdom found in the bible .  do smartphones and tablets increase time pressure or relieve it .  the answer depends on how these tools are used .  at work  mobile devices can give workers more flexibility in choosing when and where to work .  but they can also make work more stressful by creating the expectation that workers will be available at almost any hour of the day or night .  at home  cell phones may reduce time pressure by making it easier for families to coordinate their activities .  however , these devices can also intrude on family time .  studies indicate that children who have to compete with devices for a parent ' s attention may become frustrated and prone to behavioral problems .  the lazy person has his cravings , yet he  has nothing , but the diligent one  will be fully satisfied .  or  his soul .   ,  will be made fat .  better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  do not love either the world or the things in the world .  or  the bragging about one ' s possessions .  the one walking with the wise will become wise , but the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly . 
recent studies , however , revealed that the birds actually fly much farther .  tern migration follows an indirect path , as shown in the illustration tiny instruments called geolocators were attached to a number of birds .  why the revised estimates .  no matter where they began their migration , the arctic terns flew an indirect route .  as shown in the illustration , a common atlantic ocean route took an s shape .  the birds simply take advantage of prevailing wind systems .  that is equal to three or four round - trips to the moon .  what is more , because arctic terns experience the summers at both poles , they see  more daylight each year than any other creature ,  states the book life on earth  a natural history . 
a good name , or reputation , earns trust and respect a good name , or reputation , is so valuable that in some lands it is legally protected .  that may include protection against libel   and slander .  this calls to mind the ancient saying   a good name is to be chosen rather than great wealth  to be respected is better than silver and gold .  how can we earn both a good name and the respect of others .  excellent suggestions can be found in the bible .  in answer to the question ,  who may be a guest in  god ' s  tent .  the psalmist wrote   the one who is .  practicing what is right and speaking the truth in his heart .  he does not slander .   , he does nothing bad to his neighbor , and he does not defame his friends .  he rejects anyone who is contemptible .  he does not go back on his promise , even when it is bad for him .  and he does not accept a bribe .  would you not respect someone who lived by those beautiful principles .  another quality that contributes to gaining respect is humility .  consider  the humble see where they can make improvement and work hard to do so .  also , they are willing to apologize if they have offended someone .  the proud are not like that but instead are quick to take offense .  what , though , if someone smears your good name .  should you react hastily , perhaps in the heat of anger .  ask yourself ,  if i try to defend my name , will i actually be giving wider exposure to the lie .   '  while legal action may be appropriate at times , the bible gives this wise advice   do not rush into a legal dispute .  rather ,  plead your case with your neighbor .  this more measured approach can also spare you costly legal expenses .  the bible is far more than a book about religion .  it is a trustworthy guidebook for life .  all who apply its wisdom cultivate qualities that merit deep respect and contribute to a good name .  a good name  is to be chosen rather than great wealth  to be respected  is better than silver and gold .  or  a good reputation .  a melody of david .  who may reside in your holy mountain .  he does not go back on his promise ,  even when it is bad for him .  whoever does these things will never be shaken .  or  with integrity .  or  will never stagger .  o jehovah , who may be a guest in your tent .  who may reside in your holy mountain .  he does not go back on his promise ,  even when it is bad for him .  whoever does these things will never be shaken .  or  with integrity .  or  will never stagger .  the fear of jehovah is a training in wisdom , and before glory there is humility .  for we all stumble  many times .  if anyone does not stumble in word , he is a perfect man , able to bridle also his whole body .  or  make mistakes .  pride is before a crash , and a haughty spirit before stumbling .  do not rush into a legal dispute , for what will you do later if your neighbor humiliates you .  first make your peace with your brother , and then come back and offer your gift .  moreover , if your brother commits a sin , go and reveal his fault  between you and him alone .  if he listens to you , you have gained your brother .  if he does not listen even to the congregation , let him be to you just as a man of the nations and as a tax collector .   ,  and reprove him . 
help for the family   marriage couples often face their greatest challenges after their children have grown up and left home .  the empty nest can leave them feeling like virtual strangers .  i counsel many people who don ' t know how to reconnect to their spouses ,  writes family expert m .  gary neuman .  now that the children are gone ,  the parents  have very little to talk about or to share .  does that to some degree describe your marriage .  if so , you can get back on track .  first , though , consider some factors that might be to blame for the distance that has developed between you and your spouse .  for years , the children came first .  with good intentions , many parents put their children ' s needs above the needs of their marriage .  as a result , they become so accustomed to the roles of dad and mom that they lose their connection as husband and wife  a fact that becomes readily apparent once the children are gone .  but after the children left home , she admits ,  we were on separate tracks .  at one point she even said to her husband ,  we are in each other ' s way .  some couples are unprepared to adapt to this new phase of life .  for many couples , it is almost as though they are in a new marriage ,  says the book empty nesting .  feeling that they have little in common , many husbands and wives retreat into their own separate pursuits , becoming more like roommates than marriage mates .  the good news is , you can avoid the pitfalls  and even enjoy the benefits  of this new chapter in your life .  the bible can help in that effort .  let us see how .  resolve to accept the change .  concerning grown children , the bible says   a man will leave his father and his mother .  as parents , your goal was to train your children for that moment , to help them develop the skills they would need to function as adults .  viewed in that light , your children ' s leaving home is something of which you can rightly be proud .  of course , you will always be a parent to your children .  now , however , you are more of a consultant than a supervisor .  this new relationship allows you to maintain a close bond with your children while giving primary attention to your spouse .  share your concerns .  talk to your mate about how this life transition affects you , and be ready to listen to your spouse ' s feelings as well .  be patient and understanding .  it may take time to strengthen your connection as husband and wife , but doing so is worth the effort .  find new things to do together .  talk about goals you would like to pursue together or interests you would like to explore as a couple .  having raised children , you have gained much practical wisdom .  why not use that to help others .  reaffirm your commitment .  think about the qualities that attracted you to each other .  as a couple , think back on the history you have shared and the storms you have weathered .  in the end , this new chapter in your life can be a good one .  in fact , with cooperative effort you now have the opportunity to improve the quality of your marriage and rekindle the love that brought you together in the first place .  children feel especially secure when they see that their parents '  relationship is a solid one .  a man will leave his father and his mother .  what god has yoked together , let no man put apart .  love is patient and kind .  is not wisdom found among the aged .  salvatore and aurora  we came to realize that we now had more time and that we needed to take full advantage of it .  so we decided to reach out to more people  families with children as well as young couples .  we love helping others and sharing our experience with them .  carlo and caterina  it took time to accept the idea that our life had changed .  for years we talked mainly about the children .  now , when doing things together , we have gradually become accustomed to talking about ourselves and our interests .  that is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to  his wife , and they will become one flesh .  or  remain with .  for this reason a man will leave his father and his mother ,      so that they are no longer two , but one flesh .  therefore , what god has yoked together , let no man put apart .  love is patient  and kind .  love is not jealous .  it does not brag , does not get puffed up ,  or  long - suffering .  is not wisdom found among the aged , and does not understanding come with a long life .  and the two will be one flesh , '  so that they are no longer two , but one flesh .  for this reason a man will leave his father and his mother ,      so that they are no longer two , but one flesh .  therefore , what god has yoked together , let no man put apart .  love is patient  and kind .  love is not jealous .  it does not brag , does not get puffed up ,  or  long - suffering .  is not wisdom found among the aged , and does not understanding come with a long life . 
he used to believe in evolution .  but later , he changed his views .  asked him about his work and faith .  please tell us about your religious background .  my father was born in india , and my mother , although of indian origin , was born in uganda .  their lives were largely governed by hindu customs .  i am the second of three children .  we lived in nairobi , kenya .  many other hindu people lived nearby .  what stimulated your interest in science .  i was always interested in animals , and i often went hiking and camping with my friends to see the spectacular wildlife .  my initial goal was to be a veterinary surgeon .  but after graduating from a technical college in nairobi , i went to england to study pathology at the university of london .  later , i specialized in research into the human brain .  did your studies affect your religious beliefs .  the more i studied science , the harder i found it to believe in hindu mythology and traditions , such as the worship of animals and images .  why did you accept the teaching of evolution .  in my younger years , many people around me held the view that human evolution began in africa , and we often discussed this idea at school .  also , the teachers and university professors gave us students the impression that all respected scientists believe in evolution .  in time you reconsidered the question of the origin of life .  i had been studying biology and anatomy for some years when a fellow student told me what he was learning about the bible from jehovah ' s witnesses .  i became curious .  so when the witnesses held an assembly at our college hall in nairobi , i attended .  later , two witness missionaries explained some bible teachings to me .  their belief in a grand designer who has the answers to life ' s big questions did not sound like mythology .  it appealed to me as being reasonable .  did your medical knowledge hinder your belief in creation .  on the contrary .  as i studied anatomy , i saw how well - designed and complex living things are .  to attribute such a high level of sophistication to an unguided process no longer made sense to me .  can you give us an example .  it is the seat of thought and memory and the control center for many bodily functions .  the brain is also the hub of our many senses , interpreting information that comes from both inside and outside the body .  our brain functions the way it does largely because of its complex chemistry and intricate networks of neurons , the primary brain cells .  the human brain has many billions of neurons , which communicate with one another through long fibers called axons .  from these , a single neuron may make many thousands of connections with other neurons by way of branching fibers called dendrites .  as a result , the total number of connections in the brain is astronomical .  what is more , this dense forest of neurons and dendrites is , not chaotic , but precise .  it is an amazing feat of  wiring .  please explain .  the wiring progresses in a most orderly way during a baby ' s development in the womb as well as postnatally .  neurons send out fibers to target neurons that may be a few centimeters away  a vast distance on the cellular level .  the target of a fiber , by the way , may be not just a specific cell but a specific part of that cell .  as a new fiber branches out from a neuron , it is guided by chemical signposts that say such things as  stop ,   go ,  or  turn  until the fiber reaches its target .  without clear instructions , growing fibers would soon get lost .  the whole process is brilliantly orchestrated , starting with the instructions written in our dna .  that said , we are far from understanding fully how the brain develops and functions , including how it forms memories , emotions , and thoughts .  for me , just the fact that the brain works  not to mention how well it works and how beautifully it develops  points to a mind far superior to our own .  why did you become one of jehovah ' s witnesses .  the witnesses showed me evidence that the bible is god ' s word .  for example , the bible is not a science book , but when it touches on scientific matters , it is consistently correct .  it also contains accurate prophecies .  and it improves the lives of those who apply its teachings .  my own life is evidence of that .  as a result , my life has become truly satisfying and purposeful . 
the bible ' s viewpoint broken marriages , ill health , pangs of conscience  these are just some of the consequences of giving in to temptation .  how can we avoid this snare .  you are tempted when you are attracted to something  especially something wrong .  to illustrate , while shopping you see a desirable item .  the thought flashes into your mind that you could easily steal the item and not get caught .  however , your conscience says no .  so you dismiss the thought and move on .  at that point , the temptation is over , and you are the victor .  being tempted does not make you a bad person .  the bible acknowledges that we all experience temptation .  what really matters is how we act when tempted .  some dwell on the improper desire and sooner or later give in to it .  others promptly dismiss it as wrong .  each one is tried by being drawn out and enticed by his own desire .  the bible reveals the steps that lead to wrongdoing .  put simply , when we dwell on a wrong desire , we reach a point where our acting on it becomes as inevitable as a pregnant woman ' s giving birth .  yet , we can avoid being slaves to improper desires .  we can gain the mastery over them .  just as our mind can feed improper desires , it can also snuff them out .  by our focusing on something else  an activity , a conversation with a friend , or a wholesome thought .  it is also helpful to reflect on the consequences of giving in to a temptation , which may include emotional , physical , or spiritual harm .  prayer too can be a big help .  jesus christ said   pray continually , so that you may not enter into temptation .  do not be misled  god is not one to be mocked .  for whatever a person is sowing , this he will also reap .  see temptation for what it really is  a lure , or bait , that can lead a foolish , naive , or unwary person into danger .  that is especially true of temptations involving sexual immorality , which can have disastrous consequences .  if , now , your right eye is making you stumble ,  said jesus christ ,  tear it out and throw it away from you .  of course , jesus was not speaking literally .  rather , he meant that if we want to please god and gain everlasting life , we must deaden our body members , as it were , in regard to wrongdoing .  that may mean resolutely turning our back on a temptation .  turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless ,  prayed a faithful man of god .  of course , exercising self - control can be difficult .  after all ,  the flesh is weak .  so we will make mistakes .  however , when we are truly sorry and try hard not to make a habit of doing wrong , our creator , jehovah god ,  is merciful and compassionate  toward us .  how reassuring that is .  if errors were what you watch , o jah , then who , o jehovah , could stand .  no temptation has come upon you except what is common to men .  but god is faithful , and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear , but along with the temptation he will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it .  but each one is tried by being drawn out and enticed  by his own desire .  or  caught as by bait .  then the desire , when it has become fertile ,  gives birth to sin  in turn sin , when it has been carried out , brings forth death .   ,  has conceived .  finally , brothers , whatever things are true , whatever things are of serious concern , whatever things are righteous , whatever things are chaste ,  whatever things are lovable , whatever things are well - spoken - of , whatever things are virtuous , and whatever things are praiseworthy , continue considering  these things .  or  thinking about  meditating on .  if only they were wise .  they would ponder over this .  they would think about their outcome .  keep on the watch and pray continually , so that you may not enter into temptation .  the spirit , of course , is eager ,  but the flesh is weak .  or  willing .  do not be misled  god is not one to be mocked .  for whatever a person is sowing , this he will also reap       but each one is tried by being drawn out and enticed  by his own desire .  or  caught as by bait .  or  fetters .  if , now , your right eye is making you stumble , tear it out and throw it away from you .  for it is better for you to lose one of your members than for your whole body to be pitched into ge hen na .  see glossary .  deaden , therefore , your body members that are on the earth as respects sexual immorality ,  uncleanness , uncontrolled sexual passion , hurtful desire , and greediness , which is idolatry .  greek , por nei a .  see glossary .  turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless  preserve me alive in your way .  keep on the watch and pray continually , so that you may not enter into temptation .  the spirit , of course , is eager ,  but the flesh is weak .  or  willing .  jehovah is merciful and compassionate ,  slow to anger and abundant in loyal love .  or  gracious .  or  loving - kindness .  if errors were what you watch ,  o jah ,  then who , o jehovah , could stand .  or  keep track of .  jah  is a shortened form of the name jehovah . 
was it designed .  the small berry of the pollia condensata plant , found across africa , exhibits the most intense blue color ever seen in a plant .  yet it has no blue pigment .  what is the secret behind its striking color .  consider  the cell walls in the skin of the berry contain tiny threads arranged like rows of matches .  these threads form layers , each layer set off at a slight angle to the layer below , so that the rising layers form a helical , or spiral , pattern .  the threads themselves are not colored blue .  the color comes from the way the threads are stacked .  thus , structure , not pigment , is the key to the berry ' s intense metallic hue and iridescence .  most cells appear blue .  but from different angles , some emit a green , pink , or yellow hue because of subtle changes in the layers .  moreover , when examined closely , the colors are not smooth and even but appear pixelated , like the colors on a computer screen .  since pollia berries have no pigment , they keep their color even after they drop from the plant .  in fact , some berries collected over a century ago look as brilliant as fresh ones .  even though the berry has no edible pulp , just seeds , it sends an irresistible signal to nearby birds , according to researchers .  scientists believe that the pollia berry ' s pigment - free color could inspire products ranging from fade - resistant dyes to counterfeit - resistant paper .  what do you think .  did the brilliant blue of the pollia berry come about by evolution .  or was it designed . 
bible questions answered family can the bible help me to have a happy family .  wise advice from the bible has already helped millions of men and women to have happiness at home .  videos viewpoints on the origin of life monica richardson  a physician explains her faith what she learned about the miracle of childbirth changed her view on the origin of life . 
