it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures . 
in these critical times when marriage and family are under attack , is it possible to be happy as a family .  this is not a simple matter .  but there is help available .  even though this brochure is not a complete marriage manual , it highlights solid bible principles and practical suggestions .  if applied properly , these will contribute to the happiness of your family . 
the bible tells us that he made the first woman and  brought her to the man .  adam was so happy that he said   this is at last bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh .  jehovah still wants married people to be happy .  when you get married , you may think that everything will be perfect .  realistically , though , even a husband and a wife who truly love each other will have some problems .  in this brochure , you will find bible principles that , if applied , can make your marriage and family happy .  what the bible says  the husband is the head of the family .  if you are a husband , jehovah expects you to care for your wife tenderly .  he made her as a complement of you , and he wants you to treat her with dignity and love .  you must love your wife so much that you are willing to put her interests ahead of your own .  if you are a wife , jehovah expects you to respect your husband deeply and to help him fulfill his role .  support his decisions and wholeheartedly cooperate with him .  when you do , you will be beautiful in the eyes of your husband and of jehovah .  what you can do  ask your mate how you can be a better husband or wife .  listen carefully , and do what you can to improve be patient .  it will take time for both of you to learn how to make each other happy what the bible says  you need to look out for the interests of your marriage mate .  treat your mate as precious , remembering that jehovah requires his servants to be  gentle toward all .  thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword , but the tongue of the wise is a healing .  so choose your words carefully .  jehovah ' s spirit will help you to speak with kindness and love .  what you can do  pray for help to remain calm and to keep an open mind before discussing serious matters with your mate think carefully about what you will say and how you will say it what the bible says  when you get married , you become  one flesh  with your mate .  but you are still two individuals and may have different opinions .  so you need to learn to be united in your thoughts and feelings .  unity is essential when making decisions .  the bible says   by consultation , plans will succeed .  let bible principles guide you as you make important decisions together .  what you can do  share your feelings with your mate , not just information or opinions consult with your mate before making commitments   par .  do not expect perfection of yourself or of your mate .  choose to focus on your mate ' s good qualities .  be confident that bible principles will work , and be patient .  jehovah will reward your efforts to follow his advice , and your marriage will become stronger year by year .  can my mate sense that i care for him or her more than myself .  what have i done today to show love and respect to my mate .  in reply he said   have you not read that the one who created them from the beginning made them male and female      and jehovah god built the rib that he had taken from the man into a woman , and he brought her to the man .  this one will be called woman , because from man she was taken .  but even if you did marry , you would commit no sin .  and if a virgin married , such a person would commit no sin .  however , those who do will have tribulation in their flesh .  but i am trying to spare you .  the orders from jehovah are righteous , causing the heart to rejoice  the commandment of jehovah is clean , making the eyes shine .  the judgments of jehovah are true , altogether righteous .  because a husband is head of his wife just as the christ is head of the congregation , he being a savior of this body .  you husbands , in the same way , continue dwelling with them according to knowledge .  assign them honor as to a weaker vessel , the feminine one , since they are also heirs with you of the undeserved favor of life , in order for your prayers not to be hindered .  then jehovah god said   it is not good for the man to continue to be alone .  i am going to make a helper for him , as a complement of him .  nevertheless , each one of you must love his wife as he does himself  on the other hand , the wife should have deep respect for her husband .  you wives , be in subjection to your husbands , as it is becoming in the lord .  and you have become her children , provided you continue doing good and do not give in to fear .  for a slave of the lord does not need to fight , but needs to be gentle toward all , qualified to teach , showing restraint when wronged ,      thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword , but the tongue of the wise is a healing .  against such things there is no law .  let your words always be gracious , seasoned with salt , so that you will know how you should answer each person .  and said   for this reason a man will leave his father and his mother and will stick to his wife , and the two will be one flesh '  .  make my joy full by being of the same mind and having the same love , being completely united , having the one thought in mind .  by consultation , plans will succeed , and by skillful direction wage your war .  and now , my sons , listen to me  yes , happy are those who keep my ways .  for he well knows how we are formed , remembering that we are dust .  for we all stumble many times .  if anyone does not stumble in word , he is a perfect man , able to bridle also his whole body .  all scripture is inspired of god and beneficial for teaching , for reproving , for setting things straight , for disciplining in righteousness ,      so let us not give up in doing what is fine , for in due time we will reap if we do not tire out . 
this is especially important in your marriage because without loyalty , there is no trust .  and trust is essential for love to flourish .  today , loyalty in marriage is under attack .  to protect your marriage , you must be determined to do two things .  what the bible says   make sure of the more important things .  your marriage is one of the most important things in your life .  it deserves priority .  jehovah wants you to focus on your mate and  enjoy life  together .  he makes it clear that you should never neglect your mate but , rather , you both should look for ways to make each other happy .  make your mate feel needed and appreciated .  what you can do  make sure that you regularly spend time together , giving your mate your undivided attention think of  we  instead of  me  what the bible says   everyone who keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart .  if someone keeps thinking about immoral things , in a sense , he is being unfaithful to his mate .  jehovah says that you need to  safeguard your heart .  to do this , you must guard your eyes .  follow the example of the patriarch job , who made a covenant with his eyes never to look with desire at another woman .  be determined never to view pornography .  and be resolved to avoid any romantic attachment to a person other than your mate .  what you can do  make it obvious to others that you are completely committed to your mate consider your mate ' s feelings , and immediately end any relationship that would make your mate uncomfortable be honest with yourself , and identify your weaknesses .  do not be embarrassed to ask for help .  if you have immoral thoughts , keep on fighting them .  do not be discouraged .  jehovah will bless your efforts to remain loyal to your mate .  how can i make more time for my mate .  is my mate my best friend .  therefore , what god has yoked together , let no man put apart .  he has told you , o man , what is good .  and what is jehovah requiring of you .  only to exercise justice , to cherish loyalty , and to walk in modesty with your god .  that you may make sure of the more important things , so that you may be flawless and not stumbling others up to the day of christ       enjoy life with your beloved wife all the days of your futile life , which he has given you under the sun , all the days of your futility , for that is your lot in life and in your hard work at which you toil under the sun .  let each one keep seeking , not his own advantage , but that of the other person .  but i say to you that everyone who keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart .  above all the things that you guard , safeguard your heart , for out of it are the sources of life .  the heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate .  who can know it .  if , now , your right eye is making you stumble , tear it out and throw it away from you .  for it is better for you to lose one of your members than for your whole body to be pitched into ge hen na .  for it is better for you to lose one of your members than for your whole body to land in ge hen na .  i have made a covenant with my eyes .  so how could i show improper attention to a virgin .  the one who is walking faultlessly , practicing what is right and speaking the truth in his heart .  a wise person listens and takes in more instruction  a man of understanding acquires skillful direction      for the righteous one may fall seven times , and he will get up again , but the wicked will be made to stumble by calamity . 
they may result from differences in how each of you thinks , feels , and approaches life .  or problems may come from outside sources and unexpected events .  it can be tempting to avoid reality , but we are advised in the bible to face our problems .  you will find the best solutions to your problems by applying bible principles .  what the bible says   there is .  a time to speak .  make sure that you spend time talking about the problem .  honestly let your mate know how you feel and what you think on the subject .  always  speak truth  with your mate .  even when strong emotions are involved , resist the urge to fight .  a calm answer can keep what should be a simple discussion from escalating into a battle .  even if you disagree , remain gracious , never forgetting to show love and respect to your mate .  try to resolve the issue as soon as possible , and do not stop communicating .  what you can do  set an appropriate time to discuss the problem when it is your turn to listen , resist the urge to interrupt .  you will get your turn to speak what the bible says   have tender affection for one another .  in showing honor to one another , take the lead .  how you listen is very important .  try to understand your mate ' s point of view with  fellow feeling .  and humility .  do not just pretend to listen .  when possible , put aside what you are doing and give your mate your full attention , or ask if you can discuss this later .  if you think of your marriage mate as your teammate rather than your opponent , you will  not be quick to take offense .  what you can do  keep listening with an open mind , even if what you are hearing displeases you listen for the message behind the words .  notice your mate ' s body language and tone of voice what the bible says   there is benefit in every kind of hard work , but mere talk leads to want .  agreeing on a good solution is not enough .  you need to follow through on what you both decide .  this may involve hard work and much effort , but it will be worth it .  if you work together as a team , you will  have a good reward  for your hard work .  what you can do  decide what practical steps you will each take to solve your problem from time to time , evaluate your progress by working together , you can ensure that your marriage will be strong and happy rather than weak and miserable .  look to the future , and do not bring up past problems .  when you cooperate with each other and apply bible principles , you can handle any problem successfully .  what is the most urgent problem that i want to discuss with my mate .  what can i do to understand how my mate really feels about the problem .  above all things , have intense love for one another , because love covers a multitude of sins .  first make your peace with your brother , and then come back and offer your gift .  there is an appointed time for everything , a time for every activity under the heavens       a time to rip apart and a time to sew together  a time to be silent and a time to speak       therefore , now that you have put away deceit , each one of you speak truth with his neighbor , because we are members belonging to one another .  a calm tongue is a tree of life , but twisted speech causes despair .  where there is no wood , the fire goes out , and where there is no slanderer , quarreling ceases .  let your words always be gracious , seasoned with salt , so that you will know how you should answer each person .  be wrathful , but do not sin  do not let the sun set while you are still angry       in brotherly love have tender affection for one another .  in showing honor to one another , take the lead .  finally , all of you have unity of mind , fellow feeling , brotherly affection , tender compassion , and humility .  know this , my beloved brothers  everyone must be quick to listen , slow to speak , slow to anger ,      do not be quick to take offense , for the taking of offense lodges in the bosom of fools .  there is benefit in every kind of hard work , but mere talk leads to want .  idle hands will cause poverty , but diligent hands bring riches .  two are better than one because they have a good reward for their hard work .  by wisdom a house is built up , and by discernment it is made secure .  whoever forgives a transgression seeks love , but the one who keeps harping on a matter separates close friends . 
after all ,  money is a protection .  as a couple , it may be difficult to talk about money , but do not let money cause problems in your marriage .  a couple should trust each other and work together when deciding how money will be spent .  what the bible says   who of you wanting to build a tower does not first sit down and calculate the expense to see if he has enough to complete it .  it is essential that you plan together how you will use your money .  decide what you need to buy and how much you can afford to spend .  just because you have the money to buy something does not necessarily mean that you should .  try to avoid debt .  spend only the money you have .  what you can do  if you have extra money at the end of the month , decide together what you are going to do with it if you have a deficit , make specific plans to reduce your expenses .  for example , you could prepare your own meals instead of eating out what the bible says   care for everything honestly , not only in the sight of jehovah but also in the sight of men .  be honest with your mate about how much you earn and spend .  always consult your mate when making major decisions about your finances .  communicating about money will help to maintain peace in your marriage .  view your income , not as your personal money , but as family money .  what you can do  agree on an amount that each of you can spend without having to consult the other do not wait until a problem arises before you talk about money although money is important , do not allow it to disrupt your marriage or cause unnecessary anxiety .  you do not need a lot of money to enjoy life .  the bible says   guard against every sort of greed .  nothing that money can buy is more precious than your marriage .  so be content with what you have , and never neglect your relationship with god .  if you do this , your family will be happy and you will have jehovah ' s approval .  what can we do as a family to stay out of debt .  when was the last time my mate and i openly discussed our finances .  by consultation , plans will succeed , and by skillful direction wage your war .  remove untruth and lies far from me .  give me neither poverty nor riches .  just let me consume my portion of food ,      for wisdom is a protection just as money is a protection , but the advantage of knowledge is this  wisdom preserves the life of its owner .  but become kind to one another , tenderly compassionate , freely forgiving one another just as god also by christ freely forgave you .  for example , who of you wanting to build a tower does not first sit down and calculate the expense to see if he has enough to complete it .  will two walk together unless they have agreed to meet .  she sets her mind on a field and buys it  she plants a vineyard from her own labors .  the plans of the diligent surely lead to success , but all who are hasty surely head for poverty .  the rich one rules the poor , and the borrower is a slave to the lender .  for we  care for everything honestly , not only in the sight of jehovah but also in the sight of men .   '       presumptuousness leads only to strife , but wisdom belongs to those who seek advice .  certainly if anyone does not provide for those who are his own , and especially for those who are members of his household , he has disowned the faith and is worse than a person without faith .  on this account i say to you  stop being anxious about your lives as to what you will eat or what you will drink , or about your bodies as to what you will wear .  does not life mean more than food and the body than clothing .  are you not worth more than they are .   '  or ,  what are we to drink .   '  or ,  what are we to wear .  your heavenly father knows that you need all these things .  each day has enough of its own troubles .  then he said to them   keep your eyes open and guard against every sort of greed , because even when a person has an abundance , his life does not result from the things he possesses .  let your way of life be free of the love of money , while you are content with the present things .  for he has said   i will never leave you , and i will never abandon you . 
kindness , humility , mildness , and patience .  though you will always love and respect your parents , your mate is now the most important person on earth for you .  this may be difficult for some of your relatives to accept .  but bible principles can help you to find a balance , so that you can keep peace with your relatives as you work hard to build your new family relationship .  what the bible says   honor your father and your mother .  regardless of how old you are , you always need to honor and respect your parents .  recognize that your mate too , as a son or a daughter , needs to give attention to his or her parents .  love is not jealous ,  so never feel threatened by the relationship your mate has with them .  what you can do  avoid making broad statements , such as  your family always puts me down  or  your mother never likes what i do  try to see things from your mate ' s perspective what the bible says   a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife , and they will become one flesh .  when you marry , your parents may feel that they are still responsible for you , and they may want to be more involved in your marriage than they should be .  it is up to you and your mate to agree on what boundaries you will set for them and then lovingly let them know .  you can be open and direct without being rude .  humility , mildness , and patience will help you build a warm relationship with your relatives and continue  putting up with one another in love .  what you can do  if you are concerned about how much the relatives are involved in your life , discuss it with your mate when things are calm come to a mutual agreement on how you will take care of these matters it is important to understand your parents '  feelings and their point of view .  they do not mean any harm with their involvement .  they genuinely care about you .  it can be difficult for your parents to view you and your mate as an independent family .  they may even feel abandoned .  but by following bible principles and by having open communication , you will still be able to honor your parents without compromising your marriage .  why is it natural for my mate ' s parents to be interested in our marriage .  how can i put my mate first and , at the same time , show respect for my parents .  accordingly , as god ' s chosen ones , holy and loved , clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion , kindness , humility , mildness , and patience .  honor your father and your mother  is the first command with a promise       love is patient and kind .  love is not jealous .  it does not brag , does not get puffed up ,      let us not become egotistical , stirring up competition with one another , envying one another .  that is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife , and they will become one flesh .  a mild answer turns away rage , but a harsh word stirs up anger .  with all humility and mildness , with patience , putting up with one another in love , . 
as new parents , you may be surprised to find that most of your time and energy will be used to care for your baby .  lack of sleep along with emotional changes can put a strain on your relationship .  both you and your mate will have to make adjustments to care for your baby and to preserve your marriage .  how can the bible ' s advice help you to deal with these challenges .  what the bible says   love is patient and kind .  also , love  does not look for its own interests , does not become provoked .  as a new mother , you naturally focus your attention on your baby .  however , your husband may begin to feel neglected , so do not forget that he too needs your attention .  with patience and kindness , you can help him to feel needed and involved in caring for your child .  you husbands .  continue dwelling with them according to knowledge .  understand that your wife will spend most of her energy on your baby .  she has new responsibilities and may be stressed , exhausted , or even depressed .  at times , she may even get upset with you , but try to remain calm , because  the one slow to anger is better than a mighty man .  show discernment , and give her the support she needs .  what you can do  fathers  help your wife to care for the baby , even at night .  limit the amount of time you spend on other activities so that you can spend more time with your wife and your baby mothers  when your husband offers to help you with the baby , accept his help .  if he does not do the task perfectly , do not criticize him , but kindly show him how to do it what the bible says   they will become one flesh .  even though you have a new member in your family , remember that you and your mate are still  one flesh .  make every effort to keep your relationship strong .  wives , be grateful for your husband ' s help and support .  your expressions of appreciation can be  a healing .  husbands , tell your wife how much you love and value her .  praise her for the way she cares for the family .  let each one keep seeking , not his own advantage , but that of the other person .  always do what is best for your mate .  as a couple , take the time to talk , commend , and listen to each other .  be unselfish when it comes to your sexual relationship .  consider your mate ' s needs .  the bible says   do not deprive each other except by mutual consent .  so discuss this subject honestly between the two of you .  your patience and understanding will strengthen your relationship .  what you can do  do not forget to make time for just the two of you do little things that make your mate feel loved , such as sending a note or giving a small gift what the bible says   from infancy you have known the holy writings , which are able to make you wise for salvation .  plan what you will do to teach your baby .  he has an amazing ability to learn , even before he is born .  while still in the womb , your baby can recognize your voice and respond to your emotions .  read to him when he is still an infant .  even though he may not understand what you are reading , it can help him to enjoy reading when he is older .  your baby is never too young to hear you talk about god .  let him hear you pray to jehovah .  even when you play together , talk about the things that god has made .  as your child grows up , he will sense your love for jehovah and will learn to love him too .  what you can do  pray specifically for the wisdom to train your baby repeat key words and ideas to your baby so that he will begin learning early in time , you and your mate will feel comfortable and confident as parents .  raising a child can make you more loving , patient , and kind .  if you work together and support each other , having a baby will make your relationship stronger .  during the last week , what have i done to show that i am grateful for what my husband or wife does for the family .  when was the last time i talked with my mate about us instead of talking only about our baby .  sons are an inheritance from jehovah  the fruit of the womb is a reward .  love is patient and kind .  love is not jealous .  it does not keep account of the injury .  you husbands , in the same way , continue dwelling with them according to knowledge .  assign them honor as to a weaker vessel , the feminine one , since they are also heirs with you of the undeserved favor of life , in order for your prayers not to be hindered .  the one slow to anger is better than a mighty man , and the one controlling his temper than one conquering a city .  the one who is slow to anger has great discernment , but the impatient one displays his foolishness .  that is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife , and they will become one flesh .  thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword , but the tongue of the wise is a healing .  who can find a capable wife .  her value is far more than that of corals .  her children rise up and declare her happy  her husband rises up and praises her .  let each one keep seeking , not his own advantage , but that of the other person .  let the husband give to his wife her due , and let the wife also do likewise to her husband .  and that from infancy you have known the holy writings , which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in christ jesus .  teach them to your children , speaking about them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up .  sons are an inheritance from jehovah  the fruit of the womb is a reward . 
it is your responsibility as a parent to train your child to love jehovah and to become a responsible adult .  you must also learn what is in the heart of your son or daughter .  of course , your own example is very important .  you can best teach jehovah ' s word to your child if you first put it in your own heart .  what the bible says   be quick to listen , slow to speak .  you want your children to feel that they can talk to you freely .  they must know that you are ready to listen when they need to speak .  create a peaceful environment so that they will find it easy to express themselves .  if they think that you will be harsh or judgmental , they may not be truly open with you .  be patient with your children , and frequently assure them of your love .  what you can do  be available when your children need to talk have conversations with your children regularly , not just when there are problems what the bible says   the one who shows insight in a matter will find success .  sometimes you will have to look beyond your children ' s words to understand their true feelings .  it is common for young people to exaggerate or to say things they do not really mean .  when anyone replies to a matter before he hears the facts , it is foolish .  do not be quick to get upset .  what you can do  be resolved not to interrupt or overreact , no matter what your children say try to remember how you felt at their age and what seemed important to you what the bible says   listen , my son , to the discipline of your father , and do not forsake the instruction of your mother .  jehovah has given authority over children to both father and mother .  you must teach your children to respect and obey you .  children can sense if their parents are not  completely united in the same mind .  if you disagree , try not to do so in front of your children because this could undermine their respect for you as parents .  what you can do  discuss and agree on how you will discipline your children if you and your mate have a different opinion on how to train your children , try to see your mate ' s point of view what the bible says   train a boy in the way he should go .  successful education of your children will not happen by accident .  you need a training plan , which includes disciplining your children .  discipline does not simply mean punishment , but it involves helping your children to understand the reasons behind the rules .  also , teach them to love jehovah ' s word and to discern its principles .  this will help them develop a healthy conscience .  what you can do  make sure that your children see god as a real person whom they can trust help them learn to identify and avoid moral dangers , such as those found on the internet and social networks .  teach them how to avoid sexual predators  train a boy in the way he should go  as a parent , you have a special assignment , to teach your child how jehovah thinks .  jehovah knows that this is a lot of work , but you can be sure that the outcome will bring praise to god and will give you great joy .  how can i make sure that my child can talk to me about anything .  what can i learn from the way other parents are raising their children .  you children , be obedient to your parents in everything , for this is well - pleasing to the lord .  for i recall your unhypocritical faith , which dwelled first in your grandmother lo is and your mother eu nice , but which i am confident is also in you .  and that from infancy you have known the holy writings , which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in christ jesus .  to do your will , o my god , is my delight , and your law is deep within me .  know this , my beloved brothers  everyone must be quick to listen , slow to speak , slow to anger ,      moreover , the fruit of righteousness is sown in peaceful conditions for those who are making peace .  also , a voice from the heavens said   this is my son , the beloved , whom i have approved .  now concerning food offered to idols  we know we all have knowledge .  knowledge puffs up , but love builds up .  the one who shows insight in a matter will find success , and happy is the one trusting in jehovah .  when anyone replies to a matter before he hears the facts , it is foolish and humiliating .  the insight of a man certainly slows down his anger , and it is beauty on his part to overlook an offense .  listen , my son , to the discipline of your father , and do not forsake the instruction of your mother .  children , be obedient to your parents in union with the lord , for this is righteous .  now i urge you , brothers , through the name of our lord jesus christ , that you should all speak in agreement and that there should be no divisions among you , but that you may be completely united in the same mind and in the same line of thought .  train a boy in the way he should go  even when he grows old he will not depart from it .  like arrows in the hand of a mighty man , so are the sons of one ' s youth .  discipline your son and he will bring you rest  and he will give you great pleasure .  an understanding son observes the law , but a companion of gluttons disgraces his father .  but his delight is in the law of jehovah , and he reads his law in an undertone day and night .  but solid food belongs to mature people , to those who through use have their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong .  and fathers , do not be irritating your children , but go on bringing them up in the discipline and admonition of jehovah .  the father of a righteous one will surely be joyful  whoever fathers a wise son will rejoice in him . 
god lovingly provides help for us when we face difficulties .  if you apply the following scriptural principles , you and your family will be able to cope , even in the worst situations .  what the bible says   throw all your anxiety on him , because he cares for you .  always remember that god is not to blame for your trials .  as you draw close to him , he will help you in the best possible way .  pour out your hearts before him .  you will also find comfort when you read and study your bible every day .  as a result , you will experience how jehovah  comforts us in all our trials .  he promises to give you  the peace of god that surpasses all understanding .  what you can do  pray for jehovah ' s help to stay calm and think clearly review all your options and choose the best course available to you what the bible says   the heart of the understanding one acquires knowledge , and the ear of the wise seeks to find knowledge .  get all the facts .  find out what every member of your family needs .  talk with them .  listen to them .  what if a loved one dies .  do not be afraid to express your emotions .  remember that even jesus  gave way to tears .  getting enough rest and sleep is also important .  this will make it easier to cope with a distressing situation .  what you can do  before tragedy strikes , make it a habit to communicate with your family .  when problems arise , they will feel comfortable talking with you talk to others who may have faced a similar situation what the bible says   a true friend shows love at all times , and is a brother who is born for times of distress .  your friends want to help you , but they may not know what to do .  do not hold back from telling them what you really need .  also , seek spiritual help from those who understand the bible .  the guidance they can give you from the bible will help you .  you will find the support you need when you regularly associate with people who truly have faith in god and who trust in his promises .  you will also find great comfort when you help others who need encouragement .  share your faith in jehovah and his promises with them .  keep busy by helping other people in need , and do not isolate yourself from those who love you and care about you .  what you can do  talk to a close friend and let him help you be specific and honest about your needs even if you feel overwhelmed , keep your mind focused on god .  during his trials , job said   let the name of jehovah continue to be praised .  like job , place jehovah ' s name and his will above your own worries .  when matters do not turn out as you wish they would have , do not give up hope .  trust god completely .  i well know the thoughts that i am thinking toward you , '  declares jehovah ,  thoughts of peace , and not of calamity , to give you a future and a hope .  do i trust jehovah completely even in small things .  what reasons do i have to thank jehovah every day for his goodness .  because of this you are greatly rejoicing , though for a short time , if it must be , you have been distressed by various trials ,      i have seen something further under the sun , that the swift do not always win the race , nor do the mighty win the battle , nor do the wise always have the food , nor do the intelligent always have the riches , nor do those with knowledge always have success , because time and unexpected events overtake them all .  while you throw all your anxiety on him , because he cares for you .  when under trial , let no one say   i am being tried by god .  for with evil things god cannot be tried , nor does he himself try anyone .  do not be afraid , for i am with you .  do not be anxious , for i am your god .  i will fortify you , yes , i will help you , i will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness .   '       trust in him at all times , o people .  pour out your hearts before him .  god is a refuge for us .  for all the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction , so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the scriptures we might have hope .  for all things i have the strength through the one who gives me power .  the heart of the understanding one acquires knowledge , and the ear of the wise seeks to find knowledge .  the thoughts of a man ' s heart are like deep waters , but the discerning man draws them out .  jesus gave way to tears .  a time to weep and a time to laugh  a time to wail and a time to dance       better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  a true friend shows love at all times , and is a brother who is born for times of distress .  anxiety in a man ' s heart weighs it down , but a good word cheers it up .  is there anyone sick among you .  let him call the elders of the congregation to him , and let them pray over him , applying oil to him in the name of jehovah .  whoever isolates himself pursues his own selfish desires  he rejects all practical wisdom .  therefore , my beloved brothers , be steadfast , immovable , always having plenty to do in the work of the lord , knowing that your labor is not in vain in connection with the lord .  and said   naked i came out of my mother ' s womb , and naked i will return .  jehovah has given , and jehovah has taken away .  let the name of jehovah continue to be praised .  for i well know the thoughts that i am thinking toward you , '  declares jehovah ,  thoughts of peace , and not of calamity , to give you a future and a hope . 
jehovah wants you to be happy .  he promises that if you put his worship first ,  all these other things will be added to you .  he really wants you to be his friend .  make use of every opportunity to cultivate your friendship with god .  this is the greatest privilege a person can have .  what the bible says    i will become a father to you , and you will become sons and daughters to me , '  says jehovah .  god wants you to become his close friend .  prayer is one way to do this .  jehovah invites you to  pray constantly .  he is eager to hear your inner thoughts and concerns .  when you pray with your family , they will see how real god is to you .  in addition to talking to god , you need to listen to him .  you can do this by studying his word and bible - based publications .  meditate on what you learn .  listening to god also requires that you regularly attend christian meetings .  speaking to others about jehovah is another important way to strengthen your relationship with him .  the more you do this , the closer you will feel to him .  what you can do  set aside time every day to read the bible and pray as a family , give spiritual activities priority over entertainment and relaxation what the bible says   draw close to god , and he will draw close to you .  you need to schedule and follow through on a regular program of family worship .  but more is needed .  god must be part of your daily life .  strengthen your family ' s relationship with god by speaking about him  when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up .  make it your goal to be like joshua , who said   as for me and my household , we will serve jehovah .  what you can do  have a consistent training program that takes into account the needs of each member of your family there is nothing better than worshipping jehovah god .  he is delighted to see you and your family sincerely serving him .  as you do this , you will come to love and imitate jehovah more and more .  having god in your marriage makes your bond with your mate stronger .  you and your family can be happy forever , knowing that  jehovah your god has blessed you .  when was the last time we prayed together as a couple .  what can i study with my family that will strengthen our faith in jehovah .  allow nothing to interfere with your family worship ahead of time , let your family know what will be discussed so that they can prepare make sure that each family member is present create a peaceful atmosphere that all will enjoy     he was saying in a loud voice   fear god and give him glory , because the hour of judgment by him has arrived , so worship the one who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and the springs of water .  keep on , then , seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness , and all these other things will be added to you .  he said to him    you must love jehovah your god with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind .  and i will become a father to you , and you will become sons and daughters to me , '  says jehovah , the almighty .  pray constantly .  do not be anxious over anything , but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving , let your petitions be made known to god       happy is the man who does not walk according to the advice of the wicked and does not stand on the path of sinners and does not sit in the seat of scoffers .  i will remember the works of jah  i will remember your marvelous deeds of long ago .  i rejoiced when they said to me   let us go to the house of jehovah .  i am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things .  draw close to god , and he will draw close to you .  cleanse your hands , you sinners , and purify your hearts , you indecisive ones .  for i have come to know him in order that he may command his sons and his household after him to keep jehovah ' s way by doing what is right and just , so that jehovah may bring about what he has promised concerning abraham .  now if it seems bad to you to serve jehovah , choose for yourselves today whom you will serve , whether the gods that your forefathers served on the other side of the river or the gods of the am or ites in whose land you are dwelling .  but as for me and my household , we will serve jehovah .  and you must love jehovah your god with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind and with your whole strength .   '       therefore , become imitators of god , as beloved children ,      and someone may overpower one alone , but two together can take a stand against him .  and a threefold cord cannot quickly be torn apart .  this is what jehovah says , your repurchaser , the holy one of israel   i , jehovah , am your god , the one teaching you to benefit yourself , the one guiding you in the way you should walk .  you and your households must eat there before jehovah your god and rejoice in all your undertakings , because jehovah your god has blessed you . 
for additional practical advice and wisdom from god ' s word , please visit our web site .  there you will also find real - life experiences of married people like you from around the world .  treating your mate with respect how to avoid hurtful speech how to stop arguing how to forgive when a friendship gets too close when a spouse has special needs making a second marriage work how to deal with tantrums when your child is disabled talk to your children about sex when your adolescent questions your faith preparing teens for adulthood when your teenager self - injures dealing with those outside your stepfamily new subjects are regularly added . 
