is this life all there is .  table of contents
the sad reality of death
the search for long life
we are designed to live
why do we grow old and die .  conquering the enemy death how .  how can you have more than this life .  making the most of life today
what hope for the dead . 
it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit donate .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures .  this magazine , the watchtower , honors jehovah god , the ruler of the universe .  it comforts people with the good news that god ' s heavenly kingdom will soon end all wickedness and transform the earth into a paradise .  it promotes faith in jesus christ , who died so that we might gain everlasting life and who is now ruling as king of god ' s kingdom .  it adheres to the bible as its authority . 
imagine yourself watching a video about a celebrity , perhaps a famous musician whom you admire .  it starts with scenes of her childhood , her music lessons , and her endless practice .  then you see her performing in concerts , traveling far and wide , and becoming an international celebrity .  before long , come images of her golden years , and finally as the video ends  she dies .  this video is not fiction , but it provides glimpses of a life that is no more .  whether the subject was a musician , a scientist , an athlete , or some other well - known person , the story would basically be the same .  the person might have accomplished much , but do you not wonder how much more he or she could have achieved had it not been for the harsh reality of old age and death .  sad as it is , this is what awaits us all .  no matter how hard we try , we have not been able to escape the effects of aging and death .  not only that , our life may be cut short by a sudden accident or a cruel illness .  as described in the bible , we are like a morning mist that  appears for a little while and then disappears .  to some , life seems so uncertain and pointless that they follow the  let us eat and drink , for tomorrow we are to die  lifestyle .  but would you not agree that living in such a way is really an acceptance of the sad reality of death .  sooner or later  and especially when undergoing a painful ordeal  you may ask ,  is this life all there is .   '  where can you find the answer .  many today turn to science .  progress in science and medicine has extended our life expectancy .  and some scientists are working to extend life even longer .  whatever the outcome of their efforts , the questions remain  why do we grow old and die .  is there hope that our enemy death will be conquered .  the following articles will examine these topics and answer the question , is this life all there is .  for the living know  that they will die , but the dead know nothing at all , nor do they have any more reward ,  because all memory of them is forgotten .  or  are conscious .  whereas you do not know what your life will be like tomorrow .  for you are a mist that appears for a little while and then disappears .  if like other men ,  i have fought with wild beasts at eph e sus , of what good is it to me .  if the dead are not to be raised up ,  let us eat and drink , for tomorrow we are to die .  or possibly ,  from a human viewpoint . 
has the manipulating of human genes led to the secret of long life .  i have seen the occupation that god has given to the sons of men to keep them occupied .  he has made everything beautiful in its time .  he has even put eternity in their heart .  those ancient words of wise king solomon accurately describe the feelings humans have about life .  perhaps because life is short and death is unavoidable , humans have over the centuries yearned for something better .  history has many stories and legends of man ' s search for the secret to a long life .  take , for example , gilgamesh , a sumerian king .  many fanciful legends were told about his life .  one , as recounted in the epic of gilgamesh , purported that he made a dangerous journey to learn how to escape death .  he failed in his attempt .  a medieval alchemist in his laboratory in the fourth century b .   , alchemists in china tried to concoct an elixir that was believed to prolong life .  they came up with a potion laced with mercury and elements of arsenic .  it is thought that this elixir brought death to several chinese emperors .  in medieval europe , some alchemists attempted to make gold digestible because they believed that its corrosion - resistant properties could extend human life .  today , some biologists and geneticists are trying to unlock the secret of aging .  like the quest for the  elixir of life ,  their search shows that the hope of overcoming aging and death is still very much on people ' s minds .  but what have been the results of such research .  god has  put eternity in their heart .  in recent years , molecular biologists have succeeded in manipulating genes and proteins to slow down the aging process in laboratory animals and in human cells .  such advances have prompted some prominent citizens to finance research on  the problem of death .  what directions have such investigations taken .  turning back the internal clock .  some biologists believe that a key factor in aging lies in the end sections of our chromosomes , called telomeres .  telomeres protect the genetic information in our cells as they reproduce .  but each time the cells divide , the telomeres shorten .  eventually , the cells stop dividing and aging sets in .  however , their report acknowledges that telomeres  are not magical life extenders  they don ' t let us live past the normal human life span as we know it .  cellular reprogramming is another approach to curb aging .  when our cells become too old to replicate , they may send wrong signals to nearby immune cells , causing inflammation , chronic pain , and disease .  the research team leader , professor jean - marc lema�tre , declared that their work demonstrated  the reversibility of aging  in the cells .  not all scientists agree that antiaging treatments can prolong human life far beyond what is attainable today .  but this is mainly due to better hygiene , successful measures against infectious diseases , and the use of antibiotics and vaccines .  some geneticists believe that the human life span has more or less reached its natural limit .  but they are filled with trouble and sorrow  they quickly pass by , and away we fly .  despite man ' s efforts to extend our life span , life remains basically the way moses described it .   '      i have seen the occupation that god has given to the sons of men to keep them occupied .  he has even put eternity in their heart  yet mankind will never find out the work that the true god has made from start to finish .  or  well - arranged  proper  appropriate .  i have seen the occupation that god has given to the sons of men to keep them occupied .  he has even put eternity in their heart  yet mankind will never find out the work that the true god has made from start to finish .  or  well - arranged  proper  appropriate .  but they are filled with trouble and sorrow  they quickly pass by , and away we fly .  or  because of special mightiness . 
who of us does not want to enjoy a long and happy life .  just think how wonderful it would be if we could live forever in health and happiness .  we could spend more time with loved ones , travel the world , develop new skills , grow in wisdom , and learn thoroughly about whatever interests us , to our heart ' s content .  is such a desire unnatural .  far from it .  the scriptures tell us that god has put that desire within us .  they also say that  god is love .  does it make sense that a loving god would create in us a desire to live forever and then make that desire impossible to realize .  clearly , death is no friend .  in fact , the bible describes it as an unwelcome  enemy .  for some it comes early  for others it comes later .  but it always comes .  for many , thinking about it is uncomfortable , even frightening .  will this enemy ever be conquered .  is that really possible .  would it surprise you to know that it was never god ' s purpose for humans to die .  the bible book of genesis provides evidence that it was god ' s purpose for humans to live forever on earth .  jehovah god took great care to prepare the earth for human habitation .  then he created the first man , adam , and placed him in a paradise , a garden in eden .  after that ,  god saw everything he had made , and look .  it was very good .  adam was created perfect , in god ' s image .  adam ' s wife , eve , too was without defect of any kind , perfect in mind and body .  jehovah said to them   be fruitful and become many , fill the earth and subdue it , and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving on the earth .  to fill the earth with their offspring would take time .  eve would have children , and those children would bear children until the earth became fully inhabited just as god intended .  is it reasonable to think that jehovah would offer adam and eve that prospect if they were meant to live only long enough to see their children and perhaps grandchildren , and never know the outcome .  think , too , about the commission to have the animals in subjection .  adam was told to name the animals , and that would have taken time .  but to have them in subjection would have meant that he would have had to learn about them and to understand how to care for them .  that would have taken far more time .  so god ' s instructions to fill the earth and to have animals in subjection indicate that the first human couple were designed to live for a long time .  in fact , adam did live for a very long time .  they were seth , enosh , kenan , jared , methuselah , and noah .  how was such a long life possible .  all those men lived close to the time when humans were perfect .  likely that was a major factor in their longevity .  but how is perfection linked to living a long life .  and how will death be conquered .  to find the answers , we first need to understand why we grow old and die .  he has made everything beautiful  in its time .  he has even put eternity in their heart  yet mankind will never find out the work that the true god has made from start to finish .  or  well - arranged  proper  appropriate .  whoever does not love has not come to know god , because god is love .  and the last enemy , death , is to be brought to nothing .  then god said   let us make man in our image , according to our likeness , and let them have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and the domestic animals and all the earth and every creeping animal that is moving on the earth .  after that god saw everything he had made , and look .  it was very good .  and there was evening and there was morning , a sixth day .  the rock , perfect is his activity , for all his ways are justice .  a god of faithfulness who is never unjust  righteous and upright is he .  further , god blessed them , and god said to them   be fruitful and become many , fill the earth and subdue it , and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving on the earth .  for this is what jehovah says , the creator of the heavens , the true god , the one who formed the earth , its maker who firmly established it , who did not create it simply for nothing ,  but formed it to be inhabited   i am jehovah , and there is no one else .  or possibly ,  to be empty .  now jehovah god had been forming from the ground every wild animal of the field and every flying creature of the heavens , and he began bringing them to the man to see what he would call each one  and whatever the man would call each living creature ,  that became its name . 
it was not god ' s purpose for humans to die .  our first parents , adam and eve , were created perfect in mind and body  they could have been alive today .  this is clear from what jehovah said to adam concerning a certain tree that grew in the garden of eden .  in the day you eat from  the tree  ,  god told adam ,  you will certainly die .  that command would have made no sense if adam was meant to grow old and die anyway .  adam knew that if he did not eat from the tree , he would not die .  it was not god ' s purpose for humans to die adam and eve did not need to eat from that tree to sustain their life  there were many fruit - bearing trees in the garden .  by not eating from the tree , the first couple would have shown their obedience to the one who gave them life .  it would also have shown that they recognized god ' s right to direct their ways .  to understand why adam and eve died , we need to examine a conversation that had far - reaching effects .  satan the devil used a serpent to convey a malicious lie .  the bible account says   now the serpent was the most cautious of all the wild animals of the field that jehovah god had made .  so it said to the woman   did god really say that you must not eat from every tree of the garden .  to that eve replied   we may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden .  but god has said about the fruit of the tree that is in the middle of the garden   you must not eat from it , no , you must not touch it  otherwise you will die .   '   next the serpent said to her   you certainly will not die .  for god knows that in the very day you eat from it , your eyes will be opened and you will be like god , knowing good and bad .  thus , satan asserted that jehovah was a liar who was holding back something good from our first parents .  eve believed what she heard .  she gazed at the tree .  it looked so pleasing , so desirable .  she reached out , took some of the fruit , and began to eat it .  then the bible says   afterward , she also gave some to her husband when he was with her , and he began eating it .  god told adam   in the day you eat from it you will certainly die .  what did he do .  to adam , jehovah said   you will .  return to the ground , for out of it you were taken .  for dust you are and to dust you will return .  adam did not go to heaven or pass on to some spirit realm .  he had no existence before jehovah created him from the dust of the ground .  so when he died , he became as lifeless as the dust from which he was created .  he ceased to exist .  because of their deliberate disobedience , adam and eve lost their perfection and the prospect of living forever .  they underwent a physical change  they became imperfect and sinful .  but their sin of disobedience did not affect them alone .  they passed on their sinful condition to their offspring .  the bible describes sin and death as  the shroud that is enveloping all the peoples and the covering that is woven over all the nations .  this shroud envelops humankind like a poisonous mist from which there is no escape .  truly ,  in adam all are dying .  the question that arises , as posed by the apostle paul , is   who will rescue me from the body undergoing this death .  could anyone .  but as for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad , you must not eat from it , for in the day you eat from it you will certainly die .  thus jehovah god made to grow out of the ground every tree that was pleasing to look at and good for food and also the tree of life in the middle of the garden and the tree of the knowledge of good and bad .  now the serpent was the most cautious  of all the wild animals of the field that jehovah god had made .  so it said to the woman   did god really say that you must not eat from every tree of the garden .  or  shrewdest  craftiest .  at this the woman said to the serpent   we may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden .  consequently , the woman saw that the tree was good for food and that it was something desirable to the eyes , yes , the tree was pleasing to look at .  so she began taking of its fruit and eating it .  afterward , she also gave some to her husband when he was with her , and he began eating it .  but as for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad , you must not eat from it , for in the day you eat from it you will certainly die .  and to adam  he said   because you listened to your wife ' s voice and ate from the tree concerning which i gave you this command ,  you must not eat from it , '  cursed is the ground on your account .  in pain you will eat its produce all the days of your life .  for dust you are and to dust you will return .  meaning  earthling man  mankind  humankind .  that is why , just as through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin , and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned .  in this mountain he will do away with  the shroud that is enveloping all the peoples and the covering  that is woven over all the nations .   ,  swallow up .  for just as in adam all are dying , so also in the christ all will be made alive .  miserable man that i am .  who will rescue me from the body undergoing this death . 
even though the disobedience of our first parents , adam and eve , brought sin and death to all humankind , it did not change god ' s purpose for the human family .  throughout his written word , the bible , god repeatedly confirms that his purpose has not changed .  the righteous will possess the earth , and they will live forever on it .  he will swallow up death forever , and the sovereign lord jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces .  the last enemy , death , is to be brought to nothing .  death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  how will god  swallow up death ,  bringing the enemy death  to nothing .  as noted , the bible clearly says that  the righteous .  will live forever .  but it also says that  there is no righteous man on earth who always does good .  to conquer death , will god abandon his own standard .  that is unthinkable .  he will never do so , because  god .  what , then , will god do to fulfill his loving purpose in creating humans .  god  will swallow up death forever .  the basic idea of a ransom is something of equal value paid to cover damages or satisfy the demands of justice .  since all humans are sinners and under the penalty of death , the bible frankly says   none of them can ever redeem a brother or give to god a ransom for him , .  when an imperfect human dies , he can only pay the penalty for his own sins  he cannot redeem himself , nor can he pay for the sins of anyone else .  we needed a person who was perfect and sinless to offer his life , not for his own sins , but for our sins .  that is exactly what god arranged to have done .  he sent his son , jesus , from heaven to be born on earth as a perfect , sinless human .  jesus said he came to  give his life as a ransom in exchange for many .  he died to conquer the enemy death so that we may have life .  today , in fulfillment of bible prophecy , we live in  critical times hard to deal with ,  proving that we live in the  last days  of this evil system of things .  the last days will culminate in  the day of judgment and of destruction of the ungodly people .  but people who love god will survive that destruction and be blessed with  everlasting life .  jesus came to  give his life as a ransom in exchange for many .  jesus performed a resurrection when he visited the city of nain .  the only son of a widow had died , and jesus ,  moved with pity ,  raised him to life again .  also , the apostle paul said   i have hope toward god .  that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous .  this solid hope is an extraordinary demonstration of god ' s love for mankind .  billions can look forward to living forever .  the bible says   the righteous will possess the earth , and they will live forever on it .  death , where is your sting .  mankind ' s formidable enemy death will have been conquered .  the righteous will possess the earth , and they will live forever on it .  he will swallow up  death forever , and the sovereign lord jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces .  the reproach of his people he will take away from all the earth , for jehovah himself has spoken it .  or  do away with .  and the last enemy , death , is to be brought to nothing .  and he will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  the former things have passed away .  for there is no righteous man on earth who always does good and never sins .  and is based on a hope of the everlasting life that god , who cannot lie , promised long ago       he will swallow up  death forever , and the sovereign lord jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces .  the reproach of his people he will take away from all the earth , for jehovah himself has spoken it .  or  do away with .  for the one who has died has been acquitted from his sin .  for since the law has a shadow of the good things to come , but not the very substance of the things , it  can never , by the same sacrifices that are continually offered year after year , make those who approach perfect .  or possibly ,  men .  he committed no sin , nor was deception found in his mouth .  for even the son of man came , not to be ministered to , but to minister and to give his life as a ransom in exchange for many .  for god loved the world so much that he gave his only - begotten son , so that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life .  but know this , that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here .  first of all know this , that in the last days ridiculers will come with their ridicule , proceeding according to their own desires      but by the same word the heavens and the earth that now exist are reserved for fire and are being kept until the day of judgment and of destruction of the ungodly people .  these will depart into everlasting cutting - off , but the righteous ones into everlasting life .  for even the son of man came , not to be ministered to , but to minister and to give his life as a ransom in exchange for many .  soon afterward he traveled to a city called na in , and his disciples and a large crowd were traveling with him .  there was a dead man being carried out , the only son of his mother .  besides , she was a widow .  a considerable crowd from the city was also with her .  then he said   young man , i say to you , get up .  or  funeral stretcher .  or  wake up .  and i have hope toward god , which hope these men also look forward to , that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous .  the righteous will possess the earth , and they will live forever on it .  death , where is your victory .  death , where is your sting . 
life today is not the way god intended it to be .  the earth should have been filled with people who respect the creator ' s sovereignty , benefit from his guidance , and reflect his loving personality .  they were to cooperate happily with one another as they raised families , discovered new things , and made all the earth a paradise .  he is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth .  the appointed time came .  to bring to ruin those ruining the earth .  no resident will say   i am sick .  the work of their hands my chosen ones will enjoy to the full .  how will these prophecies be fulfilled .  god has appointed his son , jesus , as king of a perfect government that will rule from heaven over the earth .  the bible calls it the kingdom of god .  the bible says of jesus   god will give him the throne .   , and he will rule as king .  while on earth , jesus performed many powerful works to show that as ruler he will make human life much better than the life that we have now .  he cured every sort of disease , demonstrating how he will eliminate infirmities from mankind .  he calmed the sea , showing how he will protect people by controlling the forces of nature .  he fed thousands , showing that he will provide people with life ' s necessities .  he turned water into wine at a wedding , proving that he will help people to enjoy life .  how can you have the sort of life that god is preparing for those who love him .  there is a  road  you need to take .  the bible describes it as  the road leading off into life , and few are finding it .  what is the road to life .  god says   i , jehovah , am your god , the one teaching you to benefit yourself , the one guiding you in the way you should walk .  walking on this road is the best way of life possible .  jesus said   i am the way and the truth and the life .  it is by believing the truths that jesus taught and by imitating the example that he set that we can draw close to god and benefit ourselves .  how can you find the road to life .  there are many religions , but jesus warned   not everyone saying to me ,  lord , lord , '  will enter into the kingdom of the heavens , but only the one doing the will of my father who is in the heavens will .  he also said   by their fruits you will recognize them .  the bible can help you identify true worship and distinguish it from false worship .  how can you follow the road to life .  it involves getting to know the source of life  who is he .  what is his name .  what is he like .  what is he doing .  what does he want us to do .  god wants humans to do more than merely work , eat , play , and raise a family .  we can know our creator and become his friend .  we can show that we love him by doing his will .  jesus said   this means everlasting life , their coming to know you , the only true god .  through the bible , god teaches you  to benefit yourself .  that can seem challenging .  but in reality , it is a delightful journey that , like any other , begins with taking the first step .  to help you find answers to basic questions about god , jehovah ' s witnesses offer a free bible study course at a time and place convenient to you .  you can contact us by using our website at www .  he is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth .  he breaks the bow and shatters the spear  he burns the military wagons  with fire .  or possibly ,  the shields .  but the nations became wrathful , and your own wrath came , and the appointed time came for the dead to be judged and to reward your slaves the prophets and the holy ones and those fearing your name , the small and the great , and to bring to ruin those ruining  the earth .  or  to destroy those who are destroying .  and no resident  will say   i am sick .  the people dwelling in the land will be pardoned for their error .  or  inhabitant .  they will not build for someone else to inhabit , nor will they plant for others to eat .  for the days of my people will be like the days of a tree , and the work of their hands my chosen ones will enjoy to the full .  in the days of those kings the god of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed .  and this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people .  and jesus set out on a tour of all the cities and villages , teaching in their synagogues and preaching the good news of the kingdom and curing every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity .  so after they had dismissed the crowd , they took him in the boat , just as he was , and there were other boats with him .  so they woke him up and said to him   teacher , do you not care that we are about to perish .  and the wind abated , and a great calm set in .  taking now the five loaves and the two fish , he looked up to heaven and said a blessing .  then he broke the loaves up and began giving them to the disciples to place them before the people , and he divided up the two fish for all .  jesus said to them   fill the jars with water .  so they filled them to the brim .  so they took it .  you have saved the fine wine until now .  whereas narrow is the gate and cramped the road leading off into life , and few are finding it .  this is what jehovah says , your repurchaser , the holy one of israel   i , jehovah , am your god , the one teaching you to benefit yourself ,  the one guiding you in the way you should walk .  or  for your own good .  jesus said to him   i am the way and the truth and the life .  no one comes to the father except through me .  not everyone saying to me ,  lord , lord , '  will enter into the kingdom of the heavens , but only the one doing the will of my father who is in the heavens will .  by their fruits you will recognize them .  never do people gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles , do they .  sanctify them by means of the truth  your word is truth .  this means everlasting life , their coming to know you , the only true god , and the one whom you sent , jesus christ .  this is what jehovah says , your repurchaser , the holy one of israel   i , jehovah , am your god , the one teaching you to benefit yourself ,  the one guiding you in the way you should walk .  or  for your own good . 
life without the painful effects of sickness , old age , and death  that wonderful future can be yours .  even so , life today is still filled with harsh realities and problems .  what can help you to make the most of life today .  the bible offers guidance that can lead you to a happy and satisfying life now .  consider some of life ' s challenges and how the bible can help .  the bible ' s advice   let your way of life be free of the love of money , while you are content with the present things .  the world today bombards us with countless must - have products and services .  yet , the bible says that we can be  content with the present things .  avoid  the love of money .  people sacrifice health , family , friendships , morals , even their dignity  all for  the love of money .  what a high price to pay .  in the end , a lover of wealth  will never be satisfied .  value people , not things .  granted , material things have their place .  but things cannot love or appreciate us  only people can do that .  having  a true friend  contributes to our contentment in life .  we can make the most of life today by following the bible ' s guidance the bible ' s advice   a joyful heart is good medicine .  like  good medicine ,  joy can help us to cope with poor health .  but how can we find joy when we suffer from poor health .  be appreciative .  if we dwell on our afflictions ,  all the days  will appear bad .  instead ,  show yourselves thankful ,  says the bible .  learn to appreciate the good things in life , however small .  a beautiful sunset , a gentle breeze , the smile of a loved one  these things can enrich our life .  do things for others .  even if our health is not good ,  there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving .  when others appreciate our efforts , we feel a warm glow of satisfaction , and this takes our mind off our problems .  we can make our life better by helping others to make their life better .  the bible ' s advice   make sure of the more important things .  couples who spend little time together risk drifting apart .  husbands and wives are thus wise to give priority to their marriage  one of the more important things in life .  do things together .  instead of pursuing personal interests alone , why not plan on doing things together .  two are better than one ,  says the bible .  together , you can cook a meal , exercise , relax over a beverage , or take up a hobby .  express your love .  the bible encourages a husband and a wife to love and respect each other .  a warm smile , a loving embrace , or a small gift can do much to strengthen a marriage .  of course , spouses should reserve expressions of sexual intimacy only for each other .  told by ryoko miyamoto , japan .  life was hard .  my husband abused alcohol and could not keep a job .  he abandoned his responsibilities as father to our four children .  no matter how hard i worked , there seemed to be no light at the end of the tunnel .  i wondered ,  was this fate , or was this punishment for sins i had committed in a previous life .   '  then , one of jehovah ' s witnesses came to my door .  with a warm smile , she spoke enthusiastically about god ' s kingdom and everlasting life .  she offered me a bible study .  i soon learned that god exists and that he is wise , just , and loving .  i also learned about the condition of the dead and that my sufferings were not due to fate .  above all , i came to appreciate that a truly satisfying life is built on a relationship with god .  knowing bible truth has brought me much encouragement , freedom , and refreshment .  at last , i found purpose in life .  let your way of life be free of the love of money , while you are content with the present things .  for he has said   i will never leave you , and i will never abandon you .  for the love of money is a root of all sorts of injurious things , and by reaching out for this love some have been led astray from the faith and have stabbed themselves all over with many pains .  a lover of silver will never be satisfied with silver , nor a lover of wealth with income .  this too is futility .  a true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress .  a joyful heart is good medicine ,  but a crushed spirit saps one ' s strength .  or  good for healing .  or  dries up the bones .  all the days of the afflicted one are bad , but the one with a cheerful  heart has a continual feast .  also , let the peace of the christ rule in your hearts ,  for you were called to that peace in one body .  and show yourselves thankful .  or  control your hearts .  i have shown you in all things that by working hard in this way , you must assist those who are weak and must keep in mind the words of the lord jesus , when he himself said   there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving .   '        that you may make sure of the more important things , so that you may be flawless and not stumbling others up to the day of christ       two are better than one because they have a good reward  for their hard work .  or  greater benefit .  in the same way husbands should love their wives as their own bodies .  a man who loves his wife loves himself ,      nevertheless , each one of you must love his wife as he does himself  on the other hand , the wife should have deep respect for her husband .  let marriage be honorable among all , and let the marriage bed be without defilement , for god will judge sexually immoral people  and adulterers .  see glossary ,  sexual immorality . 
death affects every one of us .  but does death end it all .  are the dead forgotten forever .  is there any hope for the dead .  all those in the memorial tombs will .  god remembers the dead  those in his memory will come back to life .  there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous .  billions will be brought back to life with the hope of living forever in an abundance of peace .  god  counts the number of the stars  he calls all of them by name .  being able to call all the stars by name , god can easily remember people whom he will resurrect .  and i have hope toward god , which hope these men also look forward to , that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous .  he counts the number of the stars  he calls all of them by name . 
and he became father to sons and daughters .  and he became father to sons and daughters .  and he became father to sons and daughters .  and he became father to sons and daughters .  and he became father to sons and daughters .  and he became father to sons and daughters .  then he was no more , for god took him .  and he became father to sons and daughters .  see glossary . 
many people say that they believe in god .  but ask who god is , and you will get different answers .  to some , god is a harsh judge , bent on punishing people for their misdeeds .  to others , he is always loving and forgiving , no matter what they do .  still others believe that god is far away and disinterested in us .  given such conflicting views , many may feel that it is simply impossible to know who god is .  does it matter .  yes , it does .  knowing god better can add purpose and meaning to your life .  the closer you draw to god , the more he will love and help you .  ultimately , having accurate knowledge of god can lead to unending life .  how can you come to know god .  think of someone you know well , such as a close friend .  how did that friendship develop .  likely you got to know that person ' s name , personality , likes and dislikes , as well as what he or she has done and plans to do , and more .  this is what drew you to that person  you learned about him or her .  similarly , we can come to know god by considering the following    what is god ' s name .  what is he like .  what has god done .  what will he do .  what can knowing god mean for you .  this magazine is designed to provide bible answers to those questions .  the articles will help you learn not only who god is but also what is in store for you as you come into a personal relationship with him .  what is god ' s name .  when trying to get to know someone , the first thing you would likely do is ask ,  what is your name .  if you were to ask god that question , what would he say .  i am jehovah .  that is my name .  is that name new to you .  it may well be , because many translators of the bible use god ' s name sparingly , if at all .  they often replace it with the title  lord .  the name consists of four hebrew consonants , corresponding to yhwh or jhvh , and has historically been rendered  jehovah  in english .  why god ' s name matters the name matters to god himself .  no one gave god his name  he chose it for himself .  jehovah declared   this is my name forever , and this is how i am to be remembered from generation to generation .  in the bible , god ' s name occurs more often than any of his titles , such as almighty , father , lord , or god , and more often than any other personal name , such as abraham , moses , david , or jesus .  what is more , it is jehovah ' s will that his name be known .  the bible states   may people know that you , whose name is jehovah , you alone are the most high over all the earth .  the name matters to jesus .  in what has been called the our father or the lord ' s prayer , jesus taught his followers to petition god with the words   let your name be sanctified .  jesus himself prayed to god   father , glorify your name .  jesus made glorifying god ' s name a priority in his life , and for this reason he could say in prayer   i have made your name known to them and will make it known .  the name matters to those who know god .  god ' s people in the past understood that their protection and salvation were linked to god ' s unique name .  the name of jehovah is a strong tower .  into it the righteous one runs and receives protection .  everyone who calls on the name of jehovah will be saved .  the bible shows that god ' s name would distinguish those who serve him .  for all the peoples will walk , each in the name of its god , but we will walk in the name of jehovah our god forever and ever .  what the name reveals the name uniquely identifies god .  many scholars conclude that the name jehovah means  he causes to become .  jehovah god gave insight into the meaning of his name when he referred to himself with these words spoken to moses   i will become what i choose to become .  god ' s name thus conveys more than his role as the creator who causes all things to come into existence .  his name expresses his ability to cause himself as well as his creation to become whatever is needed to achieve his purpose .  while titles may describe god ' s position , authority , or power , it is only his name , jehovah , that embodies all that he is and can become .  the name reveals god ' s interest in us .  the meaning of god ' s name implies his ongoing attachment to his creation , which includes us .  moreover , the fact that god has made his name known indicates that he wants us to know him .  after all , he took the initiative to tell us his name before we even knew to ask for it .  clearly , god wants us to view him , not as some vague and distant deity , but as a real person we can draw close to .  using god ' s name reveals our interest in him .  to illustrate , you may ask someone you hope to befriend to call you by your given name .  how would you feel if that person persistently refused to use your name .  in time you would likely wonder whether that person really wanted to be close to you .  so it goes with god .  jehovah has told mankind his name , and he encourages us to use it .  when we do , we show jehovah that we want to get close to him .  why , he even notices  those meditating on  or ,  treasuring ,  footnote  his name .  learning god ' s name is the vital first step in knowing him .  but we must not stop there .  we need to discover the person behind the name .  we need to learn what he is like .  god ' s name is jehovah .  that is a question many have wondered about .  perhaps you have too .  it might be put this way  if the universe and everything in it had to have a cause or a creator , where did god come from .  scientists generally agree that the material universe had a beginning .  in harmony with this basic concept , the first verse of the bible says   in the beginning god created the heavens and the earth .  the universe could not have created itself  it could not have come from nothing .  nothing cannot produce something .  if nothing existed before the beginning of the universe , there would be no universe today .  though it is hard for us to comprehend fully , an eternal , nonmaterial first cause was necessary .  jehovah god , an infinitely powerful and wise spirit being , is that first cause .  the bible says of god   before the mountains were born or you brought forth the earth and the productive land , from everlasting to everlasting , you are god .  thus , god himself has always existed .  then ,  in the beginning  he created the material universe .  what is god like .  the more we discern someone ' s qualities , the better we know that person , and thus our friendship can deepen .  similarly , the more we come to know jehovah ' s qualities , the better we will know what he is like , and thus our friendship can deepen .  of all god ' s wonderful attributes , four are outstanding  his power , wisdom , justice , and love .  god is powerful  o sovereign lord jehovah .  you made the heavens and the earth by your great power .  evidence of god ' s power is seen in creation .  for example , when you stand outside on a bright summer day , what do you feel on your skin .  the warmth of the sun .  actually , you are feeling the results of jehovah ' s creative power .  how powerful is the sun .  every second , the sun emits energy equivalent to the explosion of many hundreds of millions of nuclear bombs .  yet our sun is small compared to many of the untold trillions of stars in the universe .  if uy scuti replaced the sun , it would engulf the earth and extend beyond the orbit of the planet jupiter .  perhaps that helps us to grasp more fully jeremiah ' s statement that jehovah god made the heavens and the earth , that is , the universe , by his great power .  how do we benefit from god ' s power .  our life depends on god ' s physical creations , such as the sun and all the wonderful resources on earth .  in addition , god uses his power to benefit humans in a personal way .  in the first century , god granted power to jesus to perform deeds that were truly miraculous .  we read   the blind are now seeing and the lame are walking , the lepers are being cleansed and the deaf are hearing , the dead are being raised up .  what about today .  he gives power to the tired one ,  says the bible , adding   those hoping in jehovah will regain power .  god can supply  power beyond what is normal  to enable us to deal with or endure the hardships and trials of life .  do you not feel drawn to a god who so lovingly uses his limitless power in our behalf .  god is wise  how many your works are , o jehovah .  you have made all of them in wisdom .  the more we learn about the things god has made , the more we find ourselves awed by his wisdom .  in fact , there is a field of study called biomimetics , or biomimicry , in which scientists examine jehovah ' s creation and borrow elements of design found in nature to enhance their own designs .  these range from a simple fastener to the design of airplanes .  god ' s wisdom is seen nowhere more marvelously than in the human body .  consider , for example , the way a human baby develops .  the process begins with one fertilized cell , which contains all the genetic instructions needed .  that cell divides into many cells that look alike .  but at just the right time , the cells begin to form differently , resulting in hundreds of distinct types , such as blood cells , nerve cells , and bone cells .  soon organ systems appear and start to function .  in just nine months , that original cell develops into a complete infant made up of billions of cells .  the wisdom seen in such design moves many to agree with the bible writer who said   i praise you because in an awe - inspiring way i am wonderfully made .  how do we benefit from god ' s wisdom .  the creator knows what we need to be happy .  drawing from his vast knowledge and understanding , he provides wise counsel in his word , the bible .  for example , it urges   continue .  forgiving one another freely .  is that wise counsel .  research has found that being forgiving can improve one ' s sleep and lower one ' s blood pressure .  it may also reduce the risk of depression and other health issues .  god is like a wise , caring friend who never ceases to give us helpful and beneficial advice .  would you not want to have such a friend .  god is just  jehovah loves justice .  god always does what is right .  in fact ,  it is unthinkable for the true god to act wickedly , for the almighty to do wrong .  his judgments are upright , as the psalmist said when addressing jehovah   you will judge the peoples fairly .  because  jehovah sees into the heart ,  he cannot be fooled by hypocrisy but is always able to perceive the truth and make accurate judgments .  furthermore , god is aware of every act of injustice and corruption on earth , and he has promised that soon  the wicked .  will be cut off from the earth .  however , god is not a harsh judge who is eager to punish .  he shows mercy when appropriate .  the bible says   jehovah is merciful and compassionate ,  even toward wicked ones if they sincerely repent .  is that not true justice .  how do we benefit from god ' s justice .  the apostle peter stated   god is not partial , but in every nation the man who fears him and does what is right is acceptable to him .  we benefit from god ' s justice because he never shows partiality or favoritism .  we can be accepted by him and be his worshippers regardless of our race , nationality , education , or social standing .  because god wants us to understand and benefit from his justice , he has provided us with a conscience .  the scriptures describe the conscience as a law  written in our hearts , '  which  bears witness '  as to whether our behavior is right or wrong .  how do we benefit .  properly trained , our conscience can motivate us to turn away from harmful or unjust actions .  and if we do make a mistake , it can move us to repent and correct our course .  indeed , an understanding of god ' s sense of justice helps us and draws us to him .  god is love  god is love .  god displays power , wisdom , and justice , but the bible does not say that god is power , wisdom , or justice .  it says that he is love .  because it can truthfully be said that god ' s power enables him to act and his justice and wisdom guide the way he acts .  but jehovah ' s love motivates him to act .  love influences everything that he does .  although jehovah did not lack anything , his love moved him to create intelligent beings , both heavenly and earthly , who can benefit from and enjoy his love and care .  he unselfishly prepared the earth to be the ideal home for his human creation .  and he continues to show love to all humans in that  he makes his sun rise on both the wicked and the good and makes it rain on both the righteous and the unrighteous .  in addition ,  jehovah is very tender in affection and merciful .  he expresses affection toward those who sincerely take steps to know and draw close to him .  god sees such people as individuals .  in fact ,  he cares for you .  how do we benefit from god ' s love .  we enjoy the beauty of a sunset .  we delight to hear a baby ' s laughter .  we cherish the love of a close family member .  these may not be essential things , but they enrich our life immeasurably .  we also benefit from another expression of god ' s love  prayer .  the bible urges us   do not be anxious over anything , but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving , let your petitions be made known to god .  like a loving father , he wants us to turn to him for help with our most intimate concerns .  then jehovah , in his unselfish love , promises to provide  the peace of god that surpasses all understanding .  has this brief discussion of god ' s principal attributes  such as his power , wisdom , justice , and love  helped you to get a better picture of what god is like .  to further your appreciation of god , we invite you to learn what he has done and will yet do for your benefit .  jehovah is more powerful , wise , and just than anyone else .  what has god done .  if you want to get to know someone well , it is helpful if you learn what he has accomplished and the challenges he has overcome .  similarly , if you want to know god well , you need to learn what he has done .  as you do , you may be surprised to discover how much of what he did in the past benefits us now and involves our future .  god created all things for our good jehovah god is the grand creator , and his  invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world ' s creation onward , because they are perceived by the things made .  he is the maker of the earth by his power , the one who established the productive land by his wisdom and who stretched out the heavens by his understanding .  the wonders of creation also reveal god ' s interest in us .  consider how jehovah enriched our life by creating humans  in his image .  that means he made it possible for us to reflect in a small way his incomparable qualities .  he endowed us with spiritual capacity , or the ability to understand his views and values .  as we endeavor to live by these , we enjoy greater happiness and meaning in life .  more than that , he gave us the potential for building a relationship with him .  the earth testifies to how god feels about us .  in the words of the apostle paul , god  did not leave himself without witness in that he did good , giving  us  rains from heaven and fruitful seasons , satisfying  us  with food and filling  our  hearts with gladness .  god supplied more than the mere necessities for our survival .  he provided abundantly in quantity and variety so we could enjoy life .  all of this is but a glimmer of what he intended for us .  jehovah created the earth so that humans could live forever on it .  the bible states   the earth he has given to the sons of men ,  and he  did not create it simply for nothing , but formed it to be inhabited .  inhabited by whom and for how long .  the righteous will possess the earth , and they will live forever on it .  accordingly , jehovah created the first man and woman , adam and eve , and settled them in an earthly paradise  to cultivate it and to take care of it .  god gave them an exciting twofold assignment   be fruitful and become many , fill the earth and subdue it .  thus adam and eve had before them the hope of enjoying unending life on earth .  sadly , they chose to disobey god and for that reason lost the prospect of being among  the righteous  who  will possess the earth .  however , as we will see , their actions have not changed jehovah ' s purpose for us or the earth .  first , though , let us consider something else god has done .  god provided his written word the bible is also known as god ' s word .  why did jehovah provide the bible for us .  primarily so that we can learn about him .  true , the bible does not answer every question we might have about god  no book ever could .  yet everything that the bible does contain helps us to know god .  we see who he is by how he deals with people .  we observe the sort of individuals he likes and dislikes .  we learn his views on worship , morality , and material things .  and the bible gives us the most intimate portrait of jehovah ' s personality through the words and actions of his son , jesus christ .  another reason jehovah provided his word , the bible , is so that we can know how to live a happy , purposeful life .  through the bible , jehovah tells us how to have a happy family , how to be content , and how to cope with anxiety .  and as explained later in this magazine , the bible contains the answers to life ' s big questions , such as  why is there so much suffering .  what will the future hold .  it also explains what god has done to see that his original purpose is fulfilled .  the bible is truly a remarkable book  a divine achievement  in many other ways .  unlike other ancient works , it has been accurately preserved down through the ages , as verified by thousands of ancient bible manuscripts .  what is more , the bible has prevailed over efforts made to keep it from being translated , distributed , and read .  today it is the most widely distributed and translated book .  the bible ' s existence is proof that  the word of our god endures forever .  god guaranteed his purpose yet another of god ' s achievements is the special provision he made to guarantee his purpose for us .  as mentioned earlier , god intended that humans live forever on earth .  however , when adam chose to disobey god and thereby sinned , he lost the opportunity for everlasting life not only for himself but also for his future children .  through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin , and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned .  man ' s disobedience thus challenged god ' s purpose .  how did jehovah react .  jehovah ' s actions were consistent with his character .  he justly held adam and eve accountable for their actions , but he lovingly made provisions for their future offspring .  in his wisdom jehovah determined how to deal with the challenge , and he immediately announced a solution .  the way out from sin and death would be provided through god ' s son , jesus christ .  what did that involve .  to redeem humans from the effects of adam ' s rebellion , jehovah sent jesus to the earth to teach people the way to life and to  give his life as a ransom in exchange for many .  jesus could provide the ransom because he was a perfect man like adam .  but unlike adam , jesus maintained perfect obedience , even to the point of death .  since jesus did not deserve to die , jehovah resurrected him back to heavenly life .  jesus could now do what adam failed to do  pass on to obedient humans the prospect of everlasting life .  for just as through the disobedience of the one man many were made sinners , so also through the obedience of the one person many will be made righteous .  through jesus '  ransom sacrifice , god will fulfill his promise to have mankind live forever on earth .  we learn much about jehovah from the way he dealt with the challenges posed by adam ' s disobedience .  we see that nothing can prevent jehovah from finishing what he started  his word will meet with  sure success .  we also appreciate the magnitude of jehovah ' s love for us .  by this the love of god was revealed in our case , that god sent his only - begotten son into the world so that we might gain life through him .  the love is in this respect , not that we have loved god , but that he loved us and sent his son as a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins .  god  did not even spare his own son but handed him over for us all ,  so we are assured that god will  kindly give us all other things  that he has promised .  what has god promised that he will do for us .  published by jehovah ' s witnesses and available online at www .  jehovah created humans to live forever on the earth .  he provided the bible so that we could learn about him .  what will god do .  if you were in difficulty , you would no doubt expect a good friend to do something to help you .  with that in mind , some say that god is not a friend because they feel god is not doing anything in their behalf .  in reality , not only has god already done many things for our benefit but he will also take action to deal with all the problems and suffering we face today .  what will god do .  end all wickedness god will end all wickedness by eliminating its source .  the bible identifies what that source is when it says   the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one .  that  wicked one  is none other than the one jesus called  the ruler of this world ,  satan the devil .  satan ' s influence on the world of mankind is the root cause of the distressing conditions on earth .  what will god do .  jehovah god will soon take action through his son , jesus christ , to  bring to nothing the one having the means to cause death , that is , the devil .  in fact , the bible shows that the devil himself knows that  he has a short period of time  before his destruction .  god will also do away with all who cause wickedness .  make the earth a paradise after eliminating all wickedness from the earth , our creator will take action to fulfill his eternal purpose regarding mankind and the earth .  what can we look forward to .  lasting peace and security .  the meek will possess the earth , and they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace .  ample and wholesome food .  there will be an abundance of grain on the earth  on the top of the mountains it will overflow .  suitable homes and satisfying work .  they will build houses and live in them , and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage .  the work of their hands my chosen ones will enjoy to the full .  do you long to see such conditions .  they will soon be an everyday experience for all .  eradicate sickness and death everyone is subject to sickness and death today , but that will not be the case much longer .  god will soon apply the benefits of jesus '  ransom sacrifice so that  everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life .  what will be the result .  sickness will be eradicated .  no resident will say   i am sick .   '  the people dwelling in the land will be pardoned for their error .  death will no longer plague mankind .  he will swallow up death forever , and the sovereign lord jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces .  people will live forever .  the gift god gives is everlasting life by christ jesus our lord .  those who have died will be brought back .  there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous .  they will benefit from god ' s gift of the ransom .  how will god accomplish all of this .  establish a perfect government god will accomplish his purpose for mankind and the earth by means of a heavenly government , with christ jesus as the appointed ruler .  it is the government , or kingdom , that jesus taught his followers to pray for in these words   our father in the heavens , .  let your kingdom come .  god ' s kingdom will exercise authority over the earth and eliminate all woes and suffering from its realm .  this kingdom is the best government mankind could ever have .  that is why jesus exerted himself to declare  the good news of the kingdom  during his earthly ministry and told his disciples to do the same .  out of his great love for his human creation , jehovah god has promised to do all these wonderful things for them .  does that not make you want to know him and draw close to him .  what will your choosing to do so mean for you .  the next article will explain .  it is a heavenly government by god that will accomplish his will .  it is ruled by a divinely appointed king with all authority in heaven and on earth .  it is governed by jesus '  teachings based on god ' s laws .  it is already in operation , with millions of people making known the  good news of the kingdom  worldwide .  published by jehovah ' s witnesses and available online at www .  what can knowing god mean for you .  up to this point , we have taken progressive steps to find the answer to the question , who is god .  we began by seeing in the bible that his name is jehovah and that his dominant quality is love .  we also considered what he has done and what he will yet do for the benefit of his human creation .  though there is much more to learn about god , you might wonder what doing so can mean for you .  jehovah promises that  if you search for him , he will let himself be found by you .  imagine the precious gift that awaits you as you search and come to know god  a  close friendship with jehovah .  what can such a friendship mean for you .  genuine happiness .  jehovah is described as  the happy god .  becoming close to him and imitating his ways will bring you genuine happiness , which can benefit you emotionally , mentally , and physically .  you will also be able to build a happy life  by avoiding damaging lifestyles , cultivating healthful habits , and maintaining good relations with others .  you will come to agree with what the psalmist said   drawing near to god is good for me .  personal care and attention .  jehovah promised his servants   i will give you advice with my eye upon you .  that means that jehovah gives his servants personal attention and tailors his care to fit their individual needs .  once you have developed a proper relationship with jehovah , you will find that he is always there for you .  a grand future .  in addition to offering you the key to a happy and satisfying life now , jehovah god also opens to you a marvelous future .  the bible states   this means everlasting life , their coming to know you , the only true god , and the one whom you sent , jesus christ .  in these turbulent times , the hope that god offers can act like an anchor that keeps us  sure and firm .  these are but a few of the many important reasons to get to know god better and to develop a personal relationship with him .  you are welcome to talk with any one of jehovah ' s witnesses or visit jw .  org for more helpful information . 
