it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit donate .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures .  this magazine , the watchtower , honors jehovah god , the ruler of the universe .  it comforts people with the good news that god ' s heavenly kingdom will soon end all wickedness and transform the earth into a paradise .  it promotes faith in jesus christ , who died so that we might gain everlasting life and who is now ruling as king of god ' s kingdom .  it adheres to the bible as its authority . 
life can be pure bliss  when all goes well .  but what if circumstances make your life seem unbearable .  for instance , sally ,  in the united states , who lost most of her possessions in a hurricane , explains   i didn ' t know how much more i could take .  many days i felt that i was near the breaking point .  or what if a loved one dies .  janice , in australia , says   when i lost both my sons , i had to gather the fragments of my shattered life and reassemble them as best i could .  i begged god   please , my heart can ' t take any more .  just let me sleep .  i don ' t want to wake up again .   '   daniel , on the other hand , was devastated when his wife was unfaithful .  he explains   when my wife confessed that she had been unfaithful , it was like a knife pierced my heart .  i felt this physical pain stabbing me again and again  and it lasted several months .  this issue of the watchtower will consider how life can be worth living even when disaster strikes a loved one dies a spouse is unfaithful you are dealing with a serious illness life becomes unbearable so , first , how can we cope when disaster strikes .  some names in this series of articles have been changed . 
our first feeling was total despair .  everything we owned had been destroyed by a mudslide and flooding .  andrew , sierra leone .  after the hurricane , we returned to our home .  nothing was left .  we were speechless .  my daughter dropped to her knees and wept .  david , virgin islands .  if you have ever survived a disaster , you may understand what other survivors have experienced  shock , denial , confusion , anxiety , and nightmares .  many disheartened and fatigued survivors have little motivation to move on in life .  if your life has been devastated by a disaster , you too may feel that you are near the breaking point .  you may even begin to feel that your life is not worth living .  however , the bible explains that your life is worth living and that you can have a firm basis for hope in a better future .  when you are just beginning to recover from a disaster , life may seem hopeless .  but as you patiently work at rebuilding your life , things can get better .  the bible foretells a time when  no more will there be heard .  the sound of weeping or a cry of distress .  this will be true when the earth is transformed into a paradise under god ' s kingdom .  disasters will be a thing of the past .  any painful memories and lingering trauma will be wiped out forever , because almighty god promises   the former things will not be called to mind , nor will they come up into the heart .  just think  the creator has arranged  to give you a future and a hope   a peaceful life under god ' s perfect rulership .  can having knowledge of this truth help make your life worth living .  sally , quoted in the opening article , states ,  reminding yourself of all the wonderful things that god ' s kingdom is going to do for us in the future can help you let go of the past and get through the present .  why not learn more about what god ' s kingdom will soon do for mankind .  doing so can assure you that despite the disaster you have suffered , your life is worth living now as you eagerly await a disaster - free future .  in the meantime , the bible provides practical guidance that can help you to cope with the aftermath of a disaster .  consider a few examples .  get needed rest .  better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  researchers report that after a traumatic experience ,  a lack of quality sleep .  can exacerbate your trauma symptoms and make it harder to maintain your emotional balance .  therefore , it is wise to get sufficient rest .  discuss your feelings .  anxiety in a man ' s heart weighs it down  or ,  depresses him ,  footnote  , but a good word cheers it up .  confide in a family member or trusted friend .  in addition to providing a listening ear , family members or close friends can provide words of encouragement and give practical help .  look ahead to better times .  there are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to  god ' s  promise , and in these righteousness is to dwell .  a person who experiences prolonged stress or severe anxiety may need to seek medical treatment .  better is the end of a matter than its beginning .  better to be patient than to be haughty in spirit .  and i will rejoice in jerusalem and exult in my people  no more will there be heard in her the sound of weeping or a cry of distress .  but the meek will possess the earth , and they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace .  the righteous will possess the earth , and they will live forever on it .  i am creating new heavens and a new earth  and the former things will not be called to mind ,  nor will they come up into the heart .  or  be remembered .  for i well know the thoughts that i am thinking toward you , '  declares jehovah ,  thoughts of peace , and not of calamity , to give you a future and a hope .  better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  anxiety in a man ' s heart weighs it down ,  but a good word cheers it up .  or  depresses him .  but there are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise , and in these righteousness is to dwell . 
i felt helpless when my older brother died unexpectedly .  months later i would suddenly remember him and feel sick , as if a knife were stabbing me deep inside .  at times , i was also angry .  why did my brother have to die .  and i felt guilty for not having spent more time with him .  vanessa , australia .  if you have lost someone you love in death , you too may have felt a wide range of emotions , from sorrow to loneliness and helplessness .  perhaps you have also felt anger , guilt , and fear .  you may have even wondered whether life is still worth living .  be assured that grief is not a sign of weakness .  it indicates how much your loved one meant to you .  however , is it possible to find a measure of relief from your painful grief .  while your pain can seem unending , you may find the following suggestions consoling  allow yourself time to grieve not everyone grieves in the same way or for the same amount of time .  still , crying can provide an outlet for fragile emotions .  vanessa , quoted earlier , says   i would just cry  i needed to release the pain .  sofía , whose sister died suddenly , says   confronting my thoughts and feelings is very painful , like opening and cleaning an infected wound .  the pain is almost unbearable , but it allows the wound to heal .  talk about your thoughts and feelings understandably , at times you may wish to be alone .  but grief is a heavy burden to carry by yourself .  seventeen - year - old jared , who lost his father , recalls   i talked about my emotions with others .  i doubt i made much sense , but it was good just to be able to express myself .  janice , quoted in the opening article , adds another benefit   talking with others was tremendously comforting .  i felt understood , and i didn ' t feel so alone .  accept help one doctor says   the bereaved who allow friends and relatives to help them through  the  initial period  of shock  tend to continue to move with some ease through the different phases of grief .  let your friends know what they can do to help  they likely want to but might not know how .  draw closer to god tina says   when i suddenly lost my husband to cancer , i could no longer confide in him , so i would tell god everything .  i started each day asking him to help me get through the day .  god helped me in more ways than i can mention .  it gave me something encouraging to think about .  visualize the resurrection tina continues   initially , the resurrection hope didn ' t comfort me because i needed my husband  and my boys needed their father  right then .  however , now , four years later , i cling to this hope .  it ' s a lifeline for me .  i imagine seeing him again , and it brings me such peace and joy .  you are not likely to experience instant relief from your grief .  nevertheless , vanessa ' s experience can be reassuring .  she says ,  you think you ' ll never get through it , but you will see brighter days .  remember , while the void you feel in your heart may not disappear , life is still worth living .  with god ' s tender help , you can still enjoy warm friendships and a purposeful life .  and soon god will resurrect the dead .  he wants you to be able to embrace your loved one again .  then that pain in your heart will be healed forever .  god cares about your grief and tears .  one bible writer said to god   do collect my tears in your skin bottle .  are they not recorded in your book .  you can pour out your heart to god .  before  god  i tell about my distress .  i call to you , o jehovah ,  for help .  you can have hope .  there is going to be a resurrection .  god promises to bring back to life countless people who have died , and he yearns to do so .  jehovah is the name of god as revealed in the bible .  published by jehovah ' s witnesses and available for free download at www .  a true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress .  you keep track of my wandering .  do collect my tears in your skin bottle .  are they not recorded in your book .  before him i pour out my concern  before him i tell about my distress      i call to you , o jehovah , for help .  i say   you are my refuge , all i have  in the land of the living .   ,  my share .  and i have hope toward god , which hope these men also look forward to , that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous .  if a man dies , can he live again .  i will wait all the days of my compulsory service until my relief comes .  you will long  for the work of your hands . 
i wanted to die when my husband said that he was leaving me for a younger woman .  it all seemed so unfair , especially when i remembered the sacrifices i had made for him .  maria , spain .  when my wife suddenly left me , it seemed that something died inside me .  our dreams , our hopes , and our plans had been destroyed .  there were days when i thought i was free from anxiety , only to find myself back in the depths of despair .  bill , spain .  marital unfaithfulness is devastating .  true , some mates have found that they can forgive a repentant spouse and rebuild their relationship .  but whether the marriage survives or not , those who discover that their mate has been unfaithful invariably suffer intense agony .  how can such ones deal with their fragile emotions .  despite the heartache , many innocent spouses have found comfort in the scriptures .  they have learned that god sees their tears and shares their pain .  when anxieties overwhelmed me , you comforted and soothed me .  as i read that verse , i imagined jehovah soothing my pain tenderly , as a compassionate father would ,  recalls bill .  with someone loyal you act in loyalty .  my husband had not been loyal ,  explains carmen , whose husband had been unfaithful for months .  but i could trust in jehovah ' s loyalty .  he would never let me down .  do not be anxious over anything , but in everything by prayer and supplication .  let your petitions be made known to god  and the peace of god that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts .  i read this text over and over again ,  says sasha .  as i prayed more and more , god gave me peace in my life .  all those quoted above felt like giving up at times .  but they trusted in jehovah god and drew strength from his word .  bill put it this way   my faith gave meaning to my life when everything else seemed to have collapsed .  though i walked for a time  in the valley of deep shadow , '  god was with me .  for a discussion of whether to forgive or not , see the series in awake .  meditate on comforting scriptures .  i read the book of job and then the psalms ,  explains bill ,  underlining every passage that seemed to fit my own circumstances .  i realized that these bible writers had experienced the kind of pain and anxiety that i was feeling .  find consolation in music .  when i could not sleep at night , i listened to music ,  carmen remembers .  this was a great source of comfort .  daniel says   i learned to play the guitar and found that the harmony needed for the music helped me recover my inner peace and harmony .  talk about your feelings .  i was not used to talking about my feelings ,  daniel says .  but i had some good friends , and i reached out to them every day .  i unburdened my feelings on them , both in writing and in conversation .  that really helped .  sasha says   the help of my family was crucial .  my mother was always there for me .  if i wanted to talk , she was there to listen .  my father also made me feel secure , and he helped me recover at my own pace .  persist in prayer .  i prayed constantly ,  says carmen .  i felt that god was near to me , listening to me , and helping me .  through this terrible time , i drew closer to god .  and there is another  thing that you do , which results in covering the altar of jehovah with tears and with weeping and sighing , so that he no longer pays attention to your gift offering or looks favorably on anything from your hand .   '  it is because jehovah has acted as a witness between you and the wife of your youth , with whom you have dealt treacherously , although she is your partner and your wife by covenant .  and what was that one seeking .  the offspring  of god .  so guard yourselves respecting your spirit , and do not deal treacherously with the wife of your youth .  and guard yourselves respecting your spirit , and you must not deal treacherously .   ,  a second .  or  your legal wife .   ,  he hates .  or  who engages in violence .  when anxieties  overwhelmed me ,  you comforted and soothed me .  or  disquieting thoughts .  or  became many inside of me .  or  your consolations soothed my soul .  though i walk in the valley of deep shadow , i fear no harm , for you are with me  your rod and your staff reassure me .  or  comfort me . 
when i learned that i had cancer in my lung and colon , i thought that i had just received a death sentence .  but after i got home from the doctor , i thought ,  ok , it ' s not what i expected , but i have to find a way to deal with this .  i suffer from a debilitating nerve syndrome on the left side of my face .  on occasion , the severe pain has caused me to fall into depression .  many times , i felt alone and even contemplated suicide .  if you or a loved one has been diagnosed with a potentially life - threatening illness , you know how distressing it can be .  in addition to the disease itself , you have to deal with fragile emotions .  fear and anxiety can be intensified by nerve - racking medical appointments , difficulty obtaining or paying for treatment , or the unpleasant side effects of medications .  the mental anguish associated with serious illness can be overwhelming .  where can we turn for assistance .  many have found that their greatest comfort comes from leaning on god in prayer and reading comforting passages found in the bible .  another help may come through the love and support that family and friends can provide .  go to jehovah in prayer .  let him know how you feel .  ask him for holy spirit .  ask him for strength to be strong for the family and to allow you to go through your illness with dignity .  it means so much when your family supports you emotionally , when they are there for you .  i get phone calls every day from one or two who ask ,  how are you doing .   '  i get encouragement from friends all over .  they definitely give me a boost , and that helps me to keep going .  if you are a friend visiting a sick person , note what linda points out   the patient no doubt wants to lead as normal a life as possible and may not always want to talk about the sickness .  so talk about the things you usually talk about .  with strength from god and comfort from the scriptures , as well as the support of loving family and friends , we can maintain our assurance that life is worth living , even when we are enduring a serious illness .  lean on god .  i inquired of jehovah , and he answered me .  he rescued me from all my fears .  this lowly one called , and jehovah heard .  linda , quoted earlier , says   i never pray ,  make me better .   '  i always pray ,  help me be strong , and help me to endure my illness .   '   draw strength from god ' s word .  no resident will say   i am sick .  tap into the sustaining power of hope by meditating on god ' s promises for the future .  seek support from family and friends .  a true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress .  do not isolate yourself ,  advises elise , quoted earlier .  allow your friends to help you .  there might be times when you feel alone and you don ' t even think that god is listening , but do not isolate yourself .  i inquired of jehovah , and he answered me .  he rescued me from all my fears .  this lowly one called , and jehovah heard .  he saved him from all his distresses .  and no resident  will say   i am sick .  the people dwelling in the land will be pardoned for their error .  or  inhabitant .  a true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress . 
these feelings were relentless ,  admits adriana , from brazil .  so i concluded that it would be better to end my life .  have you ever felt so bad that you no longer wanted to live .  then you may understand how adriana felt .  she suffered from acute anxiety and felt sad and hopeless .  adriana was diagnosed with clinical depression .  consider , too , a japanese man named kaoru , who cared for his sickly , aged parents .  at the time , i was overwhelmed by extreme pressure at work ,  he explains .  in time i lost my appetite , and my sleep was terribly disturbed .  i came to think how relieved i would be if i could just die .  a nigerian man named ojebode says ,  i was always sad to the point of shedding tears , so i looked for a means to end my life .  thankfully , ojebode , kaoru , and adriana did not take their lives .  but every year hundreds of thousands do .  most people who commit suicide are men , many of whom felt too ashamed to ask for help .  jesus said that sick people need a physician .  so if you have such feelings , please do not be ashamed to seek help .  many people who suffer from depression have found that medical treatment can help them to cope .  ojebode , kaoru , and adriana all received professional help and now cope much better .  doctors may use medication or talk therapy or both to treat depression .  those who suffer also need the empathetic support of patient , caring family and friends .  the best friend anyone can have is jehovah god , who provides wonderful help in his word , the bible .  victims of depression often need prolonged treatment and have to learn how to cope by making adjustments to their lifestyle .  but if you struggle with depression , you can look forward to a bright future , as does ojebode .   '   like ojebode , take comfort in god ' s promise of  a new earth ,  where  pain  will be no more .  that promise includes an end to all mental and emotional pain .  your painful feelings will be gone forever .  never again will your painful feelings  be called to mind , nor will they come up into  your  heart .  god understands your feelings .  i , jehovah your god , am grasping your right hand , .  saying to you ,  do not be afraid .  i will help you .  jehovah understands our feelings better than anyone else , and he wants to help us .  meditate on god ' s word .  elijah  asked that he might die .  o jehovah , take my life away .  meditating on god ' s word helped me ,  says ojebode .  i realized that the prophet elijah once felt just as i did .  learn from bible examples .  i  jesus  have made supplication for you  peter  that your faith may not give out .  after the apostle peter denied jesus three times , his feelings were hard for him to bear and he wept bitterly .  peter ' s experience ,  says kaoru ,  helped me to see that jehovah and jesus cared about peter ' s feelings .  this encouraged me .  never again will your painful feelings  be called to mind , nor will they come up into  your  heart .  and no resident  will say   i am sick .  the people dwelling in the land will be pardoned for their error .  or  inhabitant .  and i saw a new heaven and a new earth  for the former heaven and the former earth had passed away , and the sea is no more .  and he will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  the former things have passed away .  i am creating new heavens and a new earth  and the former things will not be called to mind ,  nor will they come up into the heart .  or  be remembered .  for i , jehovah your god , am grasping your right hand , the one saying to you ,  do not be afraid .  i will help you .   '       he went a day ' s journey into the wilderness and came and sat down under a broom tree , and he asked that he  might die .  he said   it is enough .  now , o jehovah , take my life  away , for i am no better than my forefathers .  or  his soul .  but i have made supplication for you that your faith may not give out  and you , once you have returned , strengthen your brothers .  i am creating new heavens and a new earth  and the former things will not be called to mind ,  nor will they come up into the heart .  or  be remembered . 
faizal required major heart surgery just over a year after his wife died .  he says   when i read the book of job , i know jehovah put it there for a reason .  when we find an example in the bible that we can relate to , it is a way of soothing our pain of heart .  he adds   life is still worth living .  tarsha was young when her mother died .  she says   knowing our creator is what gives life purpose , hope , and joy despite all the things we may have to deal with .  jehovah is more than capable of sustaining us and helping us to get through each day .  the preceding articles show how various traumatic events can make life seem unbearable .  as you carry your own personal burden , you may wonder if life is worthwhile or whether anyone even cares about you .  be assured that god does care about your distress .  you are precious to him .  you may wonder , though ,  how will god answer me  in the day of my distress .   '  although god may not take away your problems immediately , his word , the bible , assures you that he can give you inner peace to help you cope   do not be anxious over anything , but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving , let your petitions be made known to god  and the peace of god that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your thoughts .  please consider how the following bible verses give us assurance of god ' s tender care .  not one  sparrow  is overlooked by god .  you are worth more than many sparrows .  consider  seemingly insignificant birds are not inconsequential to god .  not even one tiny sparrow escapes god ' s notice  every one is a precious living creature .  humans are far more valuable to god than sparrows are .  humans , as the centerpiece of god ' s earthly creation , are made in his  image  and are capable of cultivating and displaying his elevated qualities .  o jehovah , you have searched through me , and you know me .  you discern my thoughts .  examine me , and know my anxious thoughts .  consider  god knows you personally .  he knows your most intimate feelings and concerns .  while others may not understand your distressing situation , god cares about you and wants to help you .  that makes life worth living .  o jehovah , hear my prayer  let my cry for help reach you .  incline your ear to me  do answer me quickly when i call .  he will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute .  consider  it is as if from the very start of human suffering , jehovah had been keeping a record of every tear humans have shed .  this includes your tears .  god remembers all your trials and tears because you are precious to him .  do not be anxious , for i am your god .  i will fortify you , yes , i will help you .  i , jehovah your god , am .  the one saying to you ,  do not be afraid .  i will help you .  consider  god is ready to help you .  if you fall down , he will lift you up .  god loved the world so much that he gave his only - begotten son , so that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life .  consider  you are so dear to god that he willingly gave his son , jesus , as a sacrifice in your behalf .  this sacrifice gives you the prospect of living a happy and purposeful life forever .  although you may be troubled and your life may seem to be unbearable , make a careful study of god ' s word and build your faith in the hope that god promises .  it will make you happy and confident that life is worth living .  to learn more about how you can benefit from jesus '  sacrifice , watch the video remember jesus '  death at www .  look under about us   memorial .  a prayer of david .  save your servant who is trusting in you , for you are my god .  i will walk in your truth .  unify my heart  to fear your name .  give your strength to your servant , and save the son of your slave girl .  for you , o jehovah , are my helper and comforter .  or  bend down and listen .  or  the soul of your servant .  or  i raise my soul .  or  give me an undivided heart .  or  sheol ,  that is , the common grave of mankind .  see glossary .  or  seek my soul .  or  have not set you in front of themselves .  or  gracious .  or  and truth .  or  evidence .  i call on you in the day of my distress , for you will answer me .  five sparrows sell for two coins of small value , do they not .  yet not one of them is forgotten by god .  have no fear  you are worth more than many sparrows .  or  is neglected by god  has escaped god ' s notice .  then god said   let us make man in our image , according to our likeness , and let them have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and the domestic animals and all the earth and every creeping animal that is moving on the earth .  o jehovah , you have searched through me , and you know me .  you discern my thoughts from afar .  search through me , o god , and know my heart .  examine me , and know my anxious  thoughts .  or  disquieting .  o jehovah , hear my prayer  let my cry for help reach you .  incline your ear  to me  do answer me quickly when i call .  or  bend down and listen .  he will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute  he will not despise their prayer .  you keep track of my wandering .  do collect my tears in your skin bottle .  are they not recorded in your book .  do not be afraid , for i am with you .  do not be anxious , for i am your god .  i will fortify you , yes , i will help you , i will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness .   '       for i , jehovah your god , am grasping your right hand , the one saying to you ,  do not be afraid .  i will help you .   '        for god loved the world so much that he gave his only - begotten son , so that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life . 
even if others in your life may fail you , there is one who will never leave you .  who is that .  king david of old said   even if my own father and mother abandon me , jehovah himself will take me in .  jehovah is  the father of tender mercies and the god of all comfort , who comforts us in all our trials .  throw all your anxiety on him , because he cares for you .  published by jehovah ' s witnesses .  also available at www .   , published by jehovah ' s witnesses and available online at www .  org     even if my own father and mother abandon me , jehovah himself will take me in .  while you throw all your anxiety  on him , because he cares for you .  or  cares  worries . 
death causes much grief and sadness .  that is why the bible calls death an enemy .  but what will happen to the people who have already died .  in this lesson , you will learn more about another wonderful promise of jehovah  he will bring billions of people back to enjoy life forever .  he will resurrect them .  can that really happen .  will they be resurrected to live in heaven or on earth .  what does jehovah want to do for our loved ones who have died .  jehovah longs to bring people who have died back to life .  a man of faith named job was confident that god would not forget him when he died .  he said to god   you will call , and i will answer you  from the grave .  how do we know that the dead can be resurrected .  when jesus was on earth , god gave him the power to resurrect people .  later , jesus '  friend lazarus died .  although lazarus had been dead and buried for four days , jesus brought him back to life .  after praying to god , jesus simply cried out toward the tomb   lazarus , come out .  and  the man who had been dead came out   alive .  imagine how happy lazarus '  family and friends were .  what hope is there for your loved ones who have died .  the bible promises   there is going to be a resurrection .  those whom jesus resurrected in the past had not gone to heaven .  they were happy to be brought back to life right here on earth .  likewise , jesus will soon resurrect billions to enjoy life forever on a paradise earth .  he said that  all those in the memorial tombs   even those who may seem to be forgotten but are in god ' s memory  will be resurrected .  dig deeper examine the evidence from the bible that the dead can and will be resurrected .  learn how the resurrection can bring you comfort and give you hope .  jesus proved that he can resurrect the dead learn more about what jesus did for his friend lazarus .  if lazarus had gone to heaven , do you think that jesus would have brought him back to life on earth .  play the video .  many will be resurrected .  jesus will resurrect many more than just the ones who worshipped jehovah .  the resurrection can bring you comfort and give you hope the bible account of jairus '  daughter has comforted and encouraged many who grieve .  before resurrecting jairus '  daughter , jesus told her father   have no fear , only have faith .  how might the hope of the resurrection help you .  when a loved one dies .  when your life is in danger .  play the video , and then discuss the question that follows .  video  the resurrection hope imparts courage  how .  how has the resurrection hope comforted and encouraged phelicity ' s parents .  some people say   the idea of a resurrection sounds too good to be true .  what do you think .  what scripture could you use to show that there is going to be a resurrection .  summary the bible promises that billions who have died will be resurrected .  jehovah wants them to live again , and he has given jesus the power to resurrect them .  review   how do jehovah and jesus feel about bringing the dead back to life .  where will billions of resurrected people live  in heaven or on earth .  why do you say so .  what convinces you that your loved ones can live again .  lesson completed on  __________ goal   if you know someone who is grieving , share the hope of the resurrection with him or her at an appropriate time .  other  __________ explore learn what practical steps you can take to cope with grief .  help for those who grieve    can bible principles really help someone who is grieving .  when a loved one dies   how can children cope with the death of a loved one .  the ransom   will anyone be resurrected to heaven .  who will not be resurrected .  what is the resurrection . 
i just couldn ' t believe the betrayal ,  she says .  what i ' d always feared most that my husband would leave me for someone else became an awful reality .  we promised to stand by each other , come what may ,  pat recalls .  i was convinced that he meant it .  he did that .  now i ' ve got nothing not a cat or a goldfish nothing .  hiroshi will never forget the day his mother ' s extramarital affair came to light .  mom came storming through the house .  dad was right behind her , saying ,  just hang on .  let ' s talk about this .   '  i could sense that something had gone horribly wrong .  dad was shattered .  he ' s never quite recovered .  what ' s more , he had no one to confide in .  so he turned to me .  whether it is the scandalous affairs that have rocked royalty , politicians , film stars , and religious leaders or the betrayal and tears in our own families , marital unfaithfulness continues to take a tragic toll .  adultery ,  states the new encyclopædia britannica ,  seems to be as universal and , in some instances , as common as marriage .  marriage researcher zelda west - meads says that although much infidelity goes undetected ,  all the evidence points to affairs being on the increase .  an avalanche of feelings though shocking , the statistics for infidelity and divorce do not reveal the full impact on people ' s daily lives .  besides the enormous financial implications , consider the mountains of feelings locked in those statistics the buckets of tears shed and the immeasurable confusion , grief , anxiety , and excruciating pain that is suffered , as well as the countless nights that family members spend in sleepless anguish .  the victims may survive the ordeal , but they are likely to carry the scars for a long time .  the hurt and damage is not easily undone .  a marital breakdown normally produces a huge eruption of emotions ,  explains the book how to survive divorce ,  an eruption which sometimes threatens to obscure your vision .  what should you do .  how should you react .  how do you rise above it all .  you may swing from certainty to doubt , from anger to guilt or from trust to suspicion .  that was pedro ' s experience after he learned about his wife ' s unfaithfulness .  when there is infidelity ,  he confides ,  then a flood of confusing emotions rain down .  the sense of devastation is difficult enough for victims to comprehend let alone outsiders , who have little grasp of the situation .  no one ,  claims pat ,  really understands how i feel .  when i think about my husband being with her , i feel a real physical pain , an ache that is impossible to explain to anyone .  she adds   there are times that i think i ' m going crazy .  one day i feel so in control  the next day i don ' t .  one day i miss him  the next day i remember all the scheming and lying and humiliation .  anger and anxiety  at times ,  admits one victim of infidelity ,  the emotion that hits you is raw anger .  it is not just indignation about the wrong done and the injury inflicted .  rather , as one journalist explained , it is  resentment of what could have been , and was spoilt .  also common are feelings of low self - worth and feelings of inadequacy .  pedro confides   you have feelings like these   am i not attractive enough .  am i in some other way deficient .   '  you start to dissect yourself to find the fault .  in her book to love , honour and betray , zelda west - meads , of the british national marriage guidance council , confirms   one of the hardest things to cope with .  is the decimation of your self - esteem .  guilt and depression close on the heels of these emotions usually come waves of guilt .  one despondent wife says   i think women suffer a great deal with feelings of guilt .  you blame yourself and wonder   what did i do wrong .   '   a betrayed husband reveals another aspect of what he calls roller - coaster emotions .  he explains   depression becomes a new factor that sets in like bad weather .  when her husband left her , one wife recalls that not a day went by that she was not in tears .  i can clearly remember the first tear - free day some weeks after he left me ,  she relates .  it was some months before i had my first tear - free week .  those tear - free days and weeks became milestones that marked my way forward .  double treachery what many do not realize is that often the adulterer has dealt a bitter double blow to his spouse .  in what way .  pat gives us a clue   it was hard for me .  he was not only my husband but also my friend my best friend for many years .  yes , in most cases a wife turns to her husband for support when problems arise .  now , not only has he become the cause of very traumatic problems but he has also stopped being a much - needed source of help .  in one fell swoop , he has caused severe pain and robbed his wife of her trusted confidant .  as a result , the profound sense of betrayal and shattered trust is one of the most overwhelming feelings experienced by innocent mates .  one marriage counselor explains why marital betrayal can be so emotionally crippling   we invest so much of ourselves , our hopes , dreams and expectations , in marriage .   , searching for someone we can really put our faith in , someone we feel we can always rely on .  if that trust is suddenly taken away , it can be like a house of cards blown over in the wind .  quite clearly , as noted in the book how to survive divorce , victims  need help in sorting out the emotional upheaval .  they may need help in working out what choices they can make and how to make them .  but what are those choices .  is reconciliation the answer for us .   '  you may wonder .  or should i get a divorce .   '  especially if the marriage has been strained , it may be very tempting to conclude hastily that divorce is the solution to your problems .  after all , '  you may reason ,  the bible permits divorce on the ground of marital unfaithfulness .   '    on the other hand , you may reason that the bible does not insist on divorce .  you may , therefore , feel that it would be better to reconcile and rebuild and strengthen the marriage .  whether or not to divorce an unfaithful mate is a personal decision .  yet , how can you know what to do .  first , please examine some of the factors that may help you to determine if reconciliation is possible .  footnote  some names have been changed .  is reconciliation possible .  it is simple to begin divorce proceedings impulsively ,  observes the book  couples in crisis ,   and yet there must be many marriages that are essentially worthwhile and could be successful if the problems were worked through .  this observation harmonizes with an age - old teaching of jesus christ on divorce .  although he stated that it was permissible for an innocent spouse to get a divorce on the ground of marital unfaithfulness , he did not say that doing so was compulsory .  a faithful spouse may have reasons to try to save the marriage .  the wrongdoer may still love his wife .  he may be a caring husband and devoted father who conscientiously provides for his family ' s needs .  taking into account her own needs and those of her children , the faithful spouse may decide to reconcile rather than divorce .  if so , what factors can be considered , and how can the challenges of reconstructing the marriage be met successfully .  at the outset , it has to be said that neither divorce nor reconciliation is easy .  furthermore , simply forgiving the adulterous spouse is not likely to solve underlying problems in the marriage .  it usually takes much painful self - scrutiny , frank communication , and hard work to salvage a marriage .  couples often underestimate how much time and effort it takes to rebuild a damaged marriage .  nevertheless , many have persevered and have a stable marriage to show for it .  questions to answer to make an informed decision , a faithful spouse needs to clarify her feelings and the options that are open to her .  she might consider the following  does he want to come back .  has he definitely ended the adulterous relationship , or is he reluctant to do so promptly .  has he said that he is sorry .  if so , is he truly repentant , sincerely remorseful about what he did .  or does he tend to blame me for his wrongdoing .  does he genuinely regret the hurt he has caused .  or , rather , is he merely upset that his illicit relationship has been exposed and disrupted .  what about the future .  has he started rectifying the attitudes and actions that led up to the adultery .  is he firmly resolved not to repeat the wrong .  or does he still have a tendency to flirt and to form improper emotional bonds with the opposite sex .  is he fully committed to rebuilding the marriage .  if so , what is he doing about it .  positive answers to these questions may be a basis for believing that marital restoration is possible .  vital communication  there is a frustrating of plans ,  says a bible writer ,  where there is no confidential talk .  this is certainly the case when the innocent mate feels a need to talk about the infidelity with her spouse .  without necessarily going into intimate details , they could have an honest and fervent discussion that may bring out the truth about what happened and clear up misconceptions .  this , in turn , may help prevent the couple from drawing further apart as a result of misunderstandings and long - term resentment .  granted , both husband and wife are likely to find such discussions painful .  but many have found that they are an important part of the process of restoring trust .  another essential step to an effective reconciliation is to try to identify problem areas in the marriage things that both spouses may need to work on .  zelda west - meads advises   when you ' ve talked through the pain , when you ' ve decided that the affair is definitely over , that you still want your marriage , work out what has gone wrong and renew  the  marriage .  perhaps you were taking each other for granted .  spiritual activities may have been neglected .  maybe you were not spending enough time together .  possibly you have not given as much love , tender affection , commendation , and honor as your spouse needed .  reevaluating your goals and values together will do much to bring you closer and will help prevent future unfaithfulness .  working on forgiveness despite her sincere efforts , an injured spouse may not find it easy to forgive her husband , much less the other woman .  it is possible , though , to work progressively toward letting go of resentment and bitterness .  the faithful partner needs to recognise that there comes a time when they have to move on ,  advises one reference work .  it ' s important not to keep dragging up your partner ' s old sins to punish  him  every time there is an argument .  many spouses have found that by endeavoring to reduce and eliminate feelings of intense resentment , they have eventually ceased to feel hostility toward the offender .  doing so is a vital step in rebuilding a marriage .  learn to trust again  will we be able to get that trust back again .  agonized one distraught wife .  her concern is valid because the adulterer ' s deceit has destroyed or at least seriously damaged the trust .  like a precious vase , trust is easy to smash but difficult to mend .  the fact is that there has to be mutual trust and respect for a relationship not only to survive but to flourish .  usually this will involve learning to trust again .  rather than insensitively demanding to be trusted , the guilty spouse can help rebuild trust by being completely open and honest about his activities .  christians are encouraged to  put away falsehood and speak truth '  with one another .  to win back trust , you may initially  give your  spouse  an accurate itinerary of what your exact movements are ,  says zelda west - meads .  tell your  spouse  where you are going , when you will be back and make sure that you are where you said you are going to be .  if plans change , keep her informed .  feelings of self - worth may take time and effort to rebuild .  the guilty spouse can help by being generous with affection and commendation telling his wife frequently that she is appreciated and loved .  a respected marriage counselor advises   give her credit for all she does .  the wife , in turn , can work on rebuilding self - confidence by focusing on things in her life that she does well .  it takes time in view of the intensity of the pain caused by infidelity , it is not surprising that after many years vivid and painful recollections are still possible .  however , as the hurt progressively heals , humility , patience , and endurance on the part of both will help rebuild trust and respect .  the awful pain of those first few months does not last ,  reassuringly states the book to love , honour and betray .  it  does eventually fade .  eventually you find you can go for days , weeks , months and even years without thinking about it .  as you continue applying bible principles in your marriage and seek god ' s blessing and guidance , you will no doubt experience the soothing effect of  the peace of god that excels all thought .  looking back ,  reports pedro ,  the experience has changed the course of our lives .  we still need to make a few repairs to our marriage now and again .  but we ' ve survived the ordeal .  we ' re still married .  and we ' re happy .  but what if the innocent spouse does not have reason to forgive the unfaithful one .  or what if she does forgive her spouse   and yet for sound reasons chooses to avail herself of the biblical provision of divorce .  what demands can divorce place on an individual .  we invite you to consider factors involved in divorce , as well as how some have coped .  footnotes  for simplicity , we will generally speak of the faithful spouse as being the wife .  however , the principles discussed also apply to innocent husbands whose wives are unfaithful .  please see the article  the bible ' s viewpoint  adultery to forgive or not to forgive .  jehovah ' s witnesses , for example , have access to kind and compassionate congregation elders .  counselors , friends , and relatives are encouraged not to promote personal preferences or to advocate or condemn either divorce on scriptural grounds or reconciliation .  urges one christian woman who went through a divorce   just give lots of support , and let us make up our own minds about what to do .  counsel ought to be solidly based on the bible .  don ' t tell them how they should or should not feel ,  suggests one divorcée .  rather , let them talk their hearts out .  fellow feeling , brotherly affection , and tender compassion will help soothe the deep injuries caused by marital betrayal .  an experienced counselor noted   there exists the one speaking thoughtlessly as with the stabs of a sword , but the tongue of the wise ones is a healing .  i needed understanding , a word of comfort , and encouragement ,  reflects one faithful husband .  and my wife craved some specific direction and commendation for the effort she was making tangible support that could help her continue .  if after careful and prayerful contemplation a person decides to divorce or separate for a scriptural reason , counsel should not be given in a way that makes the person feel guilty .  rather , the person can be helped to overcome unwarranted feelings of guilt .  if you want to be a meaningful source of comfort ,  said one victim ,  never forget the deep human emotions involved .  for example , some christian wives who live in strife - torn or low - income areas have stayed with an unfaithful husband who in other respects continues to care for his household , though he may not be a believer .  as a result , they have a home , needed protection , a steady income , and the relative stability of having a husband in the house even though he may be unfaithful .  they have reasoned that remaining , although not desirable or easy , has given them in their particular circumstances greater control of their lives than if they were to battle it out on their own .  after putting up with such a situation sometimes for many years some of these wives have had the joyful blessing of ultimately seeing their husbands change their ways and become faithful and loving christian husbands .  therefore , those who choose to remain with a spouse even if he is unrepentant should not be criticized .  they have had to make an unenviable decision and should be given all the help and support they need .  granted , in some cases an innocent mate ' s imperfections may have contributed to a strained relationship , yet the bible states that  each one is tried by being drawn out and enticed by his own desire .  then the desire , when it has become fertile , gives birth to sin .  although there may be various contributing factors , a person ' s  own desire  is primarily responsible for his adultery .  if a spouse ' s failings cause marital problems , committing adultery is certainly not the way to solve them .  instead , marital problems can be solved when both husband and wife persevere in applying bible principles .  this includes  putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely .  they should also persist in displaying such qualities as  the tender affections of compassion , kindness , lowliness of mind , mildness , and long - suffering .  most important , they should  clothe  themselves  with love , for it is a perfect bond of union .  but if your husband leaves you well , some think you didn ' t try hard enough .  please , please , help .  reader in south africa .  infidelity and divorce can be very traumatic .  even though many have found reasons to reconcile with their mate and preserve their marriage , others have valid reasons to choose the god - given option of divorcing an adulterous mate .  for example , the safety , spirituality , and general well - being of a faithful wife and her children may be in jeopardy .  she may also be concerned about being infected with a sexually transmitted disease .  or perhaps she has forgiven her spouse for committing adultery , but there is little basis for hoping that genuine trust can be restored and that she can continue living with him as her husband .  this was the most difficult decision of my life ,  admitted one distraught wife .  a difficult decision , indeed not only because the betrayal is so hurtful but also because divorce has far - reaching consequences that will affect her whole life .  therefore , whether or not a wife should divorce her unfaithful mate is a personal decision .  the biblical right of the innocent spouse to make that decision should be respected by others .  tragically , though , many people rush into divorce without properly counting the cost .  what are some of the factors involved in the option of divorce .  if there are children  children ' s needs are often forgotten or ignored by parents who are too absorbed in their own problems ,  states the book couples in crisis .  thus , when contemplating divorce , keep in mind the spirituality and survival of your children .  many researchers note that the more amicable a divorce can be , the less the children are likely to suffer .  even under difficult circumstances , mildness will help a person  not to fight , but to be gentle toward all , keeping himself restrained under evil .  if one chooses to divorce , it should be borne in mind that the husband and wife not the children are getting divorced .  the children still need both mom and dad .  of course , there may be extreme circumstances , such as when the child is in danger of suffering child abuse .  but religious or personal differences should not be used to deprive children of the benefit of having two parents .  also to be taken into account are the fragile emotions of young children and their need for ample reassurance , love , and affection .  this continuity of love ,  states one book ,  will provide both a background and a foundation for them to deal with the new situation .  in addition , giving attention to their daily spiritual needs can help them maintain stability .  finances and legal proceedings divorce inevitably robs each spouse of a certain amount of income and property , some comforts , and maybe a much loved home .  since an individual may have to handle increased expenditure with a reduced income , it is wise to draw up a realistic budget according to financial priorities .  the urge to compensate for losses and hurt feelings by spending more or incurring debt should be avoided .  if a decision is made to divorce , it is also necessary to resolve with one ' s spouse how joint accounts will be handled .  to prevent misuse of funds in a joint bank account , for example , it may be wise to ask the bank manager to require both spouses '  signatures for withdrawals until each has his own account .  it is also prudent to keep accurate records of income and expenses , in preparation for negotiating a maintenance settlement .  also , in many countries it is a legal requirement that people inform the tax authorities of their changed circumstances .  in addition , most people benefit from consulting a legal professional one who has specific experience in divorce issues .  some countries allow mediators or conciliators to help couples cooperate to reach mutually acceptable and peaceful agreements , which are then ratified by a court of law .  especially where children are involved , many parents prefer to use the services of a professional who is not adversarial .  rather than win at all costs , the parents aim to minimize conflict and hurt .  certain material gains are simply not worth what it would cost emotionally and financially to get them .  changed relationships  we shouldn ' t underestimate the awkwardness and uncertainty that many people feel about their divorced friends ,  informs one researcher .  even if the faithful spouse is acting within her legal , moral , and scriptural rights , there may well be some who see her as the cause of the marital breakup .  their reaction may range from a cool greeting to obvious avoidance .  worse yet , open animosity may come from formerly close companions .  many simply do not realize how much support a person needs when going through a divorce  they may be under the impression that a brief letter or a card is enough .  however , there are usually friends who  have just the right touch ,  notes the book divorce and separation ,  and will call to see if you ' re wanting to be accompanied anywhere , want something done or just feel like talking .  indeed , at such a time in life , a person needs , as the bible says ,  a friend sticking closer than a brother .  working toward recovery sixteen years after her divorce , a mother admits   there are still times when there ' s an incredible loneliness even when i ' m around people .  how does she cope .  i have built up a defense of sorts ,  she recalls ,  by keeping myself busy at work , looking after my son , and maintaining my house .  i also started attending meetings of jehovah ' s witnesses , sharing my beliefs with my neighbors , and doing things for others .  that helped a lot .  certain dates and times of the year may resurrect painful memories and emotions  the day the infidelity was revealed , the time he left the house , the date of the court case .  happy events the couple used to share such as vacations and wedding anniversaries can be difficult emotional experiences to deal with .  i handle those days by arranging to spend time with my family or with close friends who know my situation ,  says pat .  we do things that will offset thoughts of the past and make new memories .  but my biggest help is my relationship with jehovah knowing that he understands how i feel .  do not despair innocent mates who apply bible principles and choose to avail themselves of the god - given right to divorce an adulterous spouse need not feel guilty or fear that they have been abandoned by jehovah .  the treacherous course of the adulterous mate which has caused  weeping and sighing  is what is hated by god .  even jehovah , the god of  tender compassion ,  knows how it feels to be rejected by a loved one .  be assured , then , that  jehovah is a lover of justice , and he will not leave his loyal ones .  of course , it would be far better if marital unfaithfulness and its tragic consequences could be avoided in the first place .  the secret of family happiness , a practical family guide , is helping many people around the world to build happy marriages and avoid marital unfaithfulness .  it has chapters on building a happy marriage , training children , and coping with marriage problems .  jehovah ' s witnesses in your area or the publishers of this magazine will be happy to provide more information on this subject .  footnotes  more information can be found in the series  child custody what is the balanced view .  published by the watchtower bible and tract society of new york , inc .  a third of those children are younger than five years old .  contrary to what many people think ,  very few children of divorcing parents welcome the breakup ,  observes a respected health and medical writer .  the great majority of children would prefer to see their parents together even if the family atmosphere is difficult .  even if at the time of the infidelity a couple argued a lot , they should not hastily conclude that ending the marriage would be better for the children .  making changes in their attitudes and behavior may make it possible for them to stay together for the good of the whole family .  husbands being promiscuous ,  states author pamela winfield ,  should think of the pain in their children ' s eyes at the break - up of the home which will follow their foolishness .  the thing that bothered me a lot ,  admits pat ,  was the thought that  jehovah hates a divorcing .   '  always in the back of my mind was the question ,  am i doing what pleases jehovah .  in malachi ' s time many israelite men were divorcing their wives , possibly to marry younger , pagan women .  god condemned this deceitful , treacherous conduct .  hence , what is hateful to god is the frivolous putting away of one mate so as to take another .  one who deceitfully commits adultery and then either divorces his mate or pressures her to divorce him has committed a treacherous , hateful sin .  however , these verses do not condemn all divorce .  this can be confirmed by jesus '  words   whoever divorces his wife , except on the ground of fornication , and marries another commits adultery .  here jesus acknowledged that fornication is an acceptable ground for a scriptural divorce indeed , the only acceptable ground that allows for remarriage .  an innocent spouse might decide to forgive the erring marriage mate .  however , a person who chooses to use jesus '  statement as a basis for divorcing an adulterous mate is not doing something that jehovah hates .  it is the unfaithful spouse ' s deceitful conduct that is hated by god . 
he hopes that the more you learn about his personality , his ways , and his purpose , the more you will want to be his friend .  can you really be god ' s friend .  what can you do to become his friend .  the bible answers those questions and reveals why friendship with jehovah is the most important relationship you can have .  what invitation does jehovah offer you .  draw close to god , and he will draw close to you .  what does this mean .  jehovah is inviting you to become his friend .  some may find it difficult to imagine being friends with anyone they cannot see , let alone with god himself .  yet , in his word , the bible , jehovah reveals everything we need to know about his personality in order for us to draw close to him .  when we read god ' s message to us in the bible , our friendship with jehovah grows even though we have never seen him .  why is jehovah the best friend you can have .  no one loves you more than jehovah does .  he wants you to be happy and to turn to him whenever you need help .  you can  throw all your anxiety on him , because he cares for you .  jehovah is always ready to support , comfort , and listen to his friends .  what does jehovah expect of his friends .  jehovah loves people in general ,  but his close friendship is with the upright .  jehovah expects his friends to try to do things that he views as good and to avoid things that he considers bad .  some may feel that they could never live up to jehovah ' s standards of good and bad .  however , jehovah is large - hearted .  he accepts everyone who truly loves him and does his best to please him .  dig deeper learn more about how you can become jehovah ' s friend , and discover why he is the best friend you can have .  abraham was jehovah ' s friend the bible account of abraham   gives us a glimpse of what it means to be god ' s friend .  then discuss these questions    what did jehovah ask abraham to do .  what did jehovah promise him .  how did abraham respond to jehovah ' s instructions .  what jehovah asks of his friends we usually expect certain things of our friends .  what are some things that you like your friends to do for you .  in order to obey jehovah , we may need to change our conduct or our personality traits .  what jehovah does for his friends jehovah helps his friends cope with problems .  play the video , and then discuss the question that follows .  video  jehovah has done so much for me     how has jehovah helped the woman in the video to deal with her negative thinking and emotions .  do you think jehovah would make a good friend .  friendship with jehovah involves communication communication strengthens bonds of friendship .  how does jehovah communicate with us .  some people say   it ' s impossible to be close to god .  what scripture would you use to show that we can be jehovah ' s friend .  summary jehovah wants to be your friend , and he will help you draw close to him .  review   how does jehovah help his friends .  why does jehovah instruct his friends to make changes .  do you think jehovah expects too much of his friends .  why , or why not .  lesson completed on  __________ goal   share with a friend something that you have learned about jehovah .  other  __________ explore how can friendship with god affect your life .  jehovah  a god worth knowing    learn how to cultivate a friendship with god .  how can i become god ' s friend .  find out why one woman feels that her friendship with jehovah saved her .  i did not want to die .  listen to teenagers express their feelings about jehovah .  what does it mean to be god ' s friend .  he hopes that the more you learn about his personality , his ways , and his purpose , the more you will want to be his friend .  can you really be god ' s friend .  what can you do to become his friend .  the bible answers those questions and reveals why friendship with jehovah is the most important relationship you can have .  what invitation does jehovah offer you .  draw close to god , and he will draw close to you .  what does this mean .  jehovah is inviting you to become his friend .  some may find it difficult to imagine being friends with anyone they cannot see , let alone with god himself .  yet , in his word , the bible , jehovah reveals everything we need to know about his personality in order for us to draw close to him .  when we read god ' s message to us in the bible , our friendship with jehovah grows even though we have never seen him .  why is jehovah the best friend you can have .  no one loves you more than jehovah does .  he wants you to be happy and to turn to him whenever you need help .  you can  throw all your anxiety on him , because he cares for you .  jehovah is always ready to support , comfort , and listen to his friends .  what does jehovah expect of his friends .  jehovah loves people in general ,  but his close friendship is with the upright .  jehovah expects his friends to try to do things that he views as good and to avoid things that he considers bad .  some may feel that they could never live up to jehovah ' s standards of good and bad .  however , jehovah is large - hearted .  he accepts everyone who truly loves him and does his best to please him .  dig deeper learn more about how you can become jehovah ' s friend , and discover why he is the best friend you can have .  abraham was jehovah ' s friend the bible account of abraham   gives us a glimpse of what it means to be god ' s friend .  then discuss these questions    what did jehovah ask abraham to do .  what did jehovah promise him .  how did abraham respond to jehovah ' s instructions .  what jehovah asks of his friends we usually expect certain things of our friends .  what are some things that you like your friends to do for you .  in order to obey jehovah , we may need to change our conduct or our personality traits .  what jehovah does for his friends jehovah helps his friends cope with problems .  play the video , and then discuss the question that follows .  video  jehovah has done so much for me     how has jehovah helped the woman in the video to deal with her negative thinking and emotions .  do you think jehovah would make a good friend .  friendship with jehovah involves communication communication strengthens bonds of friendship .  how does jehovah communicate with us .  some people say   it ' s impossible to be close to god .  what scripture would you use to show that we can be jehovah ' s friend .  summary jehovah wants to be your friend , and he will help you draw close to him .  review   how does jehovah help his friends .  why does jehovah instruct his friends to make changes .  do you think jehovah expects too much of his friends .  why , or why not .  lesson completed on  __________ goal   share with a friend something that you have learned about jehovah .  other  __________ explore how can friendship with god affect your life .  jehovah  a god worth knowing    learn how to cultivate a friendship with god .  how can i become god ' s friend .  find out why one woman feels that her friendship with jehovah saved her .  i did not want to die .  listen to teenagers express their feelings about jehovah .  what does it mean to be god ' s friend . 
