it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit donate .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures .  this magazine , the watchtower , honors jehovah god , the ruler of the universe .  it comforts people with the good news that god ' s heavenly kingdom will soon end all wickedness and transform the earth into a paradise .  it promotes faith in jesus christ , who died so that we might gain everlasting life and who is now ruling as king of god ' s kingdom .  it adheres to the bible as its authority . 
all around the world , mental health problems afflict millions of people .  young and old from all economic and educational levels , diverse ethnic groups , and religious backgrounds are having to deal with distressing symptoms .  what are mental illnesses , and how do they affect people .  this magazine will discuss the importance of proper medical treatment as well as how the bible can help sufferers in various practical ways . 
i always have a measure of anxiety , even if i ' m just sitting by myself in a room .  when i feel extraordinarily well , i become apprehensive .  i instinctively know that what follows a  high '  is a plunge to a moody  low .   '    i try to take it one day at a time , but sometimes several days attack me at once .  can you relate to those expressions from individuals who struggle with their mental health .  are you  or is someone you care about  facing a similar struggle .  be assured that you are not alone .  many people today are affected by mental health issues , whether their own or those of their loved ones .  without a doubt , we are living in  critical times hard to deal with  that are causing many forms of distress .  one study calculated that , worldwide , about one in eight people struggles with a mental health disorder .  our mental health , however , is not defined by statistics .  it is about how you and your loved ones feel and how you live your lives .  good mental health is a state of well - being where you feel good and can function well .  you can cope with normal stresses , work productively , and feel satisfied with life .  is not the result of personal weakness .  is a medical condition that causes significant distress and disrupts a person ' s thinking , emotional control , and behavior .  can often upset a person ' s ability to relate to others and to handle the daily demands of life .  can affect people of any age , culture , race , tribe , religion , educational background , or income level .  if you or a loved one experiences significantly noticeable changes in personality , disturbed sleeping or eating patterns , or prolonged distress , anxiety , or sadness , you may need professional help to identify and treat the root causes .  but where can you go for help .  the wisest man who ever lived , jesus christ , stated   healthy people do not need a physician , but those who are ill do .  those struggling with health challenges who receive appropriate medical therapy and medication can do much to minimize their symptoms and can be helped to live a productive and fulfilling life .  it is wise for such ones not to delay treatment if the symptoms are serious or prolonged .  although the bible is not a medical guidebook , what it contains can benefit our mental health .  we warmly invite you to consider the following articles that discuss how the bible can help us deal with mental health problems .  the watchtower does not endorse any particular approach .  each individual should carefully evaluate his or her options before making a personal decision .  but know this , that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here .  hearing them , he said   healthy people do not need a physician , but those who are ill do . 
the bible is the best source of spiritual guidance available .  it is not a health - care manual , but it can help us in practical ways to deal with distressing circumstances , turbulent thought patterns , painful emotions , and upsetting physical and mental health issues .  most important , the bible assures us that our creator , jehovah god ,  understands our thoughts and feelings better than anyone else .  he is eager to help us deal with any issues we face .  consider , for example , two comforting bible passages   jehovah is close to the brokenhearted  he saves those who are crushed in spirit .  i , jehovah your god , am grasping your right hand , the one saying to you ,  do not be afraid .  i will help you .  how , though , does jehovah help us to deal with mental health problems .  as you will see in the following articles , jehovah shows that he truly cares for us in many helpful ways .  jehovah is god ' s personal name .  jehovah is close to the brokenhearted  he saves those who are crushed in spirit .  or  are discouraged .  for i , jehovah your god , am grasping your right hand , the one saying to you ,  do not be afraid .  i will help you .   '       may people know that you , whose name is jehovah , you alone are the most high over all the earth . 
the bible says   throw all your anxiety on  god  , because he cares for you .  jehovah god invites us to talk to him about any burden that weighs on our mind and heart .  no problem is too big or too small to pray about .  if it matters to us , it matters to jehovah .  praying to him is an important step toward gaining peace of mind .  when we struggle with our mental health , we may feel completely alone .  other people do not always understand fully what we are going through .  but when we sincerely tell god in prayer how we feel , we will find a sympathetic and understanding listener .  jehovah sees us , he knows our pain and struggles , and he wants us to pray to him about anything that concerns us .  talking to jehovah in prayer reinforces our confidence that he cares for us .  we can feel as did the psalmist who prayed   you have seen my affliction  you are aware of my deep distress .  just knowing that jehovah is sensitive to what we are dealing with can do much to help us keep going through difficult times .  but he does more than just notice our distress .  better than anyone else , he understands what we are going through and helps us find comfort and encouragement in the bible .  how anxiety affects me  i struggle with anxiety and obsessive - compulsive disorder .  anxiety affects me at seemingly random times .  one moment i am fine , and the next i feel extremely anxious for no apparent reason .  i especially become anxious when i am around other people .  i am intensely concerned with what they think of me .  those who know of my struggles are very supportive .  i have to admit that sometimes what they say is not what i was hoping to hear .  but i appreciate their well - meaning efforts .  at times , my anxiety and ocd make it a challenge to pray .  it takes a lot of mental effort for me to concentrate and talk to jehovah in prayer .  my thoughts move very fast  too fast for me to keep up with most of the time .  when i get stuck in my own head , it is hard to put my thoughts and feelings into words .  how the bible helps me  i have learned from studying the bible that prayers do not need to be lengthy or eloquent to be acceptable to god .  sometimes when i cannot put my feelings into words , i simply pray   jehovah , please help me .   '  even then , i sense that jehovah understands me and responds to what i need at the moment .  in addition to prayer , i have sought medical therapy .  i am happy to say that thanks to both of these sources of help , my condition is much improved .  it is absolutely worth the effort to reach out to my heavenly father and experience his loving support .  org website , learn why you can be confident that jehovah hears and answers your prayers .  see the video become jehovah ' s friend  pray anytime .  while you throw all your anxiety  on him , because he cares for you .  or  cares  worries .  throw your burden on jehovah , and he will sustain you .  never will he allow the righteous one to fall .  or  stagger  totter .  the heart knows its own bitterness ,  and no outsider can share in its joy .  or  the bitterness of its soul .  or  the distresses of my soul . 
the bible says   all the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction , so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the scriptures we might have hope .  the bible contains comforting thoughts that can give us the strength and endurance we need to cope with negative patterns of thinking .  the bible ' s message also gives us hope that emotional pain will soon be a thing of the past .  we all deal with feelings of distress at times  but those who suffer from depression or anxiety may struggle daily with relentlessly painful emotions .  how can the bible help .  the bible provides many positive thoughts that can replace negative ones .  it can truly fill our mind with comforting and soothing thoughts that will help us control our emotions .  the bible can help us to counteract the thought that we are worthless .  numerous bible passages reassure us that we are not alone and that god , our creator , completely understands our feelings .  the bible promises that god will put an end to painful memories .  when we are suffering from disturbing thoughts and emotions , we may find that this promise gives us the strength to go on .  i was tormented by flashbacks and intrusive memories .  doctors helped me understand that my depression was related to negative thinking patterns that were triggered by traumatic events in my life .  in addition to appropriate medication , i needed therapy to help me identify and correct unhealthy thinking patterns .  how the bible helps me  in the darkest moments of my depression , i experienced panic attacks , extreme anxiety , and sleeplessness .  often at night i would feel overwhelmed by disquieting thoughts that raced around in my head .  so i kept my bible and a notebook of encouraging scriptures near my bed .  when i couldn ' t fall asleep , i would read some bible verses , thus allowing god ' s thoughts to comfort me .  the bible encourages us to overturn thoughts that go contrary to what we know about god .  in the past , i was convinced that i was worthless , unlovable , and useless .  but i have learned that such beliefs are actually contrary to the bible , which depicts god as a loving and compassionate father who cares about us individually .  i gradually took control of my thoughts rather than allow my thoughts to control me .  i have learned to view myself as god views me .  this was an important step in helping me break down the negative view i had of myself .  i look forward to the time when all painful memories and unhealthy thinking patterns will disappear .  knowing that mental disorders will be a thing of the past gives me the strength to cope with my limitations now as well as a wonderful hope for the future when my battle against depression will finally be over .  listen to the audio recording of the book of psalms on jw .  for all the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction , so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the scriptures we might have hope .  finally , brothers , whatever things  are true , whatever things are of serious concern , whatever things are righteous , whatever things are chaste , whatever things are lovable , whatever things are well - spoken - of , whatever things are virtuous , and whatever things are praiseworthy , continue considering these things .   ,  as many   as .  when i said   my foot is slipping ,  your loyal love , o jehovah , kept supporting me .  or  disquieting thoughts .  or  became many inside of me .  or  your consolations soothed my soul .  five sparrows sell for two coins of small value , do they not .  yet not one of them is forgotten by god .  have no fear  you are worth more than many sparrows .  or  is neglected by god  has escaped god ' s notice .  jehovah is close to the brokenhearted  he saves those who are crushed in spirit .  or  are discouraged .  or  persuade  convince .  i am creating new heavens and a new earth  and the former things will not be called to mind ,  nor will they come up into the heart .  or  be remembered .  and he will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  the former things have passed away .  when anxieties  overwhelmed me ,  you comforted and soothed me .  or  disquieting thoughts .  or  became many inside of me .  or  your consolations soothed my soul . 
the bible describes .  faithful men and women who experienced  feelings like ours .  the bible ' s pages are filled with real - life accounts of men and women who experienced a wide range of emotions .  as we read their experiences , we may find a bible character whom we can relate to .  we all need to feel understood .  but this is especially true when we struggle with our mental health .  when we read the real - life experiences of bible characters , we may identify with them and relate to their thoughts and feelings .  as a result , we realize that we are not alone in our distress and we feel less isolated when dealing with anxiety and disturbing emotions .  the bible records many expressions of those who felt helpless and desperate .  have you ever felt ,  i just can ' t take it anymore '  .  moses did , as did elijah and david .  the bible tells us of a woman named hannah who felt  extremely bitter  because she could not have children and was being cruelly taunted about it by her rival wife .  the bible tells of a man named job whom we may relate to .  although being a man of faith , he suffered from deep emotional distress and once said   i loathe my life  i do not want to go on living .  by learning how these bible characters successfully dealt with negative patterns of thinking , we too can find the strength we need to cope with our distresses .  how bipolar disorder affects me  i was diagnosed with bipolar disorder when i was in my late forties .  there are times when i feel that i can deal with anything that life throws at me .  but at other times , i feel that life is not worth living .  how the bible helps me  one bible character i can relate to is the apostle peter .  he made mistakes that caused him to feel worthless .  but instead of staying in that frame of mind , peter sought the company of friends who cared about him .  when i am having a bad day with my bipolar disorder , my own imperfections can overwhelm me and make me feel worthless .  like peter , i have learned to try to stay close to my friends who want to help me keep moving forward with my life .  another bible character who is of great comfort to me is king david .  he often felt depressed about his situation and regretted his past mistakes .  i can relate to him because at times i do or say things that i regret .   '  this really describes how i feel in my darkest moments , as it can be hard to think positively about myself .   '  i use a similar appeal to god to help me feel differently about myself .  it says   a heart broken and crushed , o god , you will not reject .   '  this verse reassures me that god loves me .  by focusing on bible examples and what god has given me now , i strengthen my hope for the future .  the bible ' s promises become a reality for me and that really helps keep me going .  e li jah was a man with feelings like ours , and yet when he prayed earnestly for it not to rain , it did not rain on the land for three years and six months .  i am not able to bear all this people by myself  it is too much for me .  he went a day ' s journey into the wilderness and came and sat down under a broom tree , and he asked that he  might die .  he said   it is enough .  now , o jehovah , take my life  away , for i am no better than my forefathers .  or  his soul .  my heart is in anguish within me , and the terrors of death overwhelm me .  moreover , her rival wife taunted her relentlessly in order to upset her because jehovah had not given her children .  han nah was extremely bitter ,  and she began to pray to jehovah and to weep uncontrollably .  or  bitter of soul .  i loathe my life  i do not want to go on living .  leave me alone , for my days are like a breath .  to the director .  a melody of david , when nathan the prophet came in to him after david had relations with bath - she ba .  blot out my transgressions according to your great mercy .  therefore , you are righteous when you speak , you are right in your judgment .  i was born guilty of error , and my mother conceived me in sin .  you find pleasure in truth in the inner person  teach my innermost self  true wisdom .  or  on my mind .   ,  only you .  or  and sinful from the moment my mother conceived me .  or  my secret self .  or  hide your face .  or  blot out .   ,  may you support me with a willing  spirit .  or  despise .  for i am well - aware of my transgressions , and my sin is always before me .  or  on my mind .  create in me a pure heart , o god , and put within me a new spirit , a steadfast one .  the sacrifices pleasing to god are a broken spirit  a heart broken and crushed , o god , you will not reject .  or  despise . 
the bible says   all scripture is .  while not a medical textbook , the bible offers practical and beneficial advice .  this advice can help a person who is struggling with mental health difficulties .  consider some examples .  healthy people do not need a physician , but those who are ill do .  the bible acknowledges that we may need to seek medical treatment .  many have found relief by learning what they can about their mental illness from reliable sources and by getting qualified professional help .  exercise is good for your body .  investing time and energy in healthy habits may help improve your mental health .  such habits include sticking to a regular exercise routine , following a healthy diet , and getting enough sleep .  a joyful heart is good medicine , but a crushed spirit saps one ' s strength .  reading encouraging bible passages and setting reasonable and reachable goals can help maintain a happy spirit .  a positive and hopeful attitude can help you to stay emotionally balanced as you cope with your mental health challenges .  wisdom is with the modest ones .  you may find that you are not able to do everything that you want to on your own , so willingly accept the help of others .  friends and family likely want to help you , but they may not know what to do .  let them know what would be especially helpful to you .  be reasonable in what you expect , and always be thankful for the help they provide .  i felt that something was not right with me , so i consulted a doctor .  she was able to diagnose my condition .  this helped me to accept the reality of my situation and to learn about available medical options to better care for my health .  nicole ,  who suffers from bipolar disorder .  i have found that reading the bible regularly with my wife helps me to start each day with positive , upbuilding thoughts .  and often on days when i ' m struggling to cope , a particular verse will touch my heart .  peter , who suffers from depression .  it was difficult to tell others about my struggle because i was very ashamed .  but a close friend was so understanding and empathetic .  she really helped me to feel better and to feel that i was not alone .  ji - yoo , who struggles with an eating disorder .  the bible has helped me to be balanced and reasonable when it comes to work and rest .  its wisdom has helped me to deal with the emotional problems that plague me .  timothy , who copes with obsessive - compulsive disorder .  some names have been changed .  watch the whiteboard animation from sad to glad on jw .  all scripture is inspired of god and beneficial for teaching , for reproving , for setting things straight , for disciplining in righteousness ,      hearing them , he said   healthy people do not need a physician , but those who are ill do .  for physical training is beneficial for a little , but godly devotion is beneficial for all things , as it holds promise of the life now and the life that is to come .  a joyful heart is good medicine ,  but a crushed spirit saps one ' s strength .  or  good for healing .  or  dries up the bones .  when presumptuousness comes , dishonor will follow , but wisdom is with the modest ones . 
the bible says   a true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress .  we can easily be overwhelmed when a friend is suffering from mental distress .  but we can show how much we care by helping our friend to cope with a distressing mental health problem .  be quick to listen .  one of the best ways to help your friend is to listen when he wants to talk .  do not feel that you have to respond to everything he says .  acknowledge what he says , and try to remain compassionate .  keep an open mind , and avoid jumping to conclusions or being judgmental .  remember that he may say things that he does not mean and later regrets .  speak consolingly .  your friend may be anxious , or he may struggle with feelings of worthlessness .  by reassuring him that you care , you can be comforting and encouraging , even if you do not know exactly what to say .  a true friend shows love at all times .  offer practical help .  instead of assuming that you know how to help , ask what you can do .  if your friend has a hard time expressing what he needs , try suggesting something practical you could do together , such as going for a walk .  or you could offer to help with shopping , cleaning , or some other task .  your friend may not always be ready to talk .  reassure your friend that you will gladly listen when he does feel like talking .  because of his illness , your friend may say or do things that hurt you .  he may cancel plans with you or become irritable .  be patient and understanding as you offer the support he needs .  i make sure that i am a friend that she can count on .  even though i don ' t have the solution to her problems , i make it a point to listen to what she has to say .  sometimes all she needs is a listening ear to make her feel better .  farrah ,  whose friend suffers from eating and anxiety disorders and clinical depression .  one of my friends is so kind and positive .  she invited me to her home for a delicious meal .  in such a warm and loving atmosphere , i was able to express my feelings .  that really encouraged me .  ha - eun , who suffers from clinical depression .  patience is so important .  when my wife does something that upsets me , i remind myself that it is an expression of her illness , not who she is on the inside .  this helps me to avoid becoming angry and to be more considerate toward her .  jacob , whose wife suffers from clinical depression .  my wife has been an incredible support and comfort to me .  when i feel overwhelmed with anxiety , she never forces me to do anything that i don ' t feel like doing .  sometimes that means that she doesn ' t get to do something that she would have loved to do .  her self - sacrificing spirit and generosity are irreplaceable .  enrico , who suffers from anxiety disorder .  some names have been changed .  a true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress .  know this , my beloved brothers  everyone must be quick to listen , slow to speak , slow to anger ,       if only my anguish could be fully weighed and put on scales together with my calamity .  that is why my words have been wild talk .  or  rash , reckless speech .  on the other hand , we urge you , brothers , to warn the disorderly , speak consolingly to those who are depressed , support the weak , be patient toward all .  a true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress .  go on carrying the burdens of one another , and in this way you will fulfill the law of the christ .  on the other hand , we urge you , brothers , to warn the disorderly , speak consolingly to those who are depressed , support the weak , be patient toward all .  there are companions ready to crush one another , but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother . 
through the bible , god provides guidance and comfort to deal with mental distress .  but god has done even more .  he has promised to remove the very causes of mental disorders permanently .  when god fulfills that promise , never again will painful feelings , mental distress , and hurtful memories  be called to mind , nor will they come up into the heart .  jehovah ' s witnesses will be happy to help you find out when and how god will fulfill this heartwarming promise .  i am creating new heavens and a new earth  and the former things will not be called to mind ,  nor will they come up into the heart .  or  be remembered . 
yet , he never doubted that the creator understands us in every way .  o jehovah , you have searched through me , and you know me ,  he wrote .  you yourself have come to know my sitting down and my rising up .  you have considered my thought from far off .  for there is not a word on my tongue , but , look .  o jehovah , you already know it all .  we too can be certain that our creator understands us and the debilitating effect that depression can have on our imperfect minds and bodies .  he knows what causes depression and how we can best cope under present circumstances .  furthermore , he has revealed how he will cure depression forever .  we could wish for no one better to help us than our compassionate  god , who comforts and encourages and refreshes and cheers the depressed .  but depressed ones may wonder how god can help them when they experience distressing emotions .  is god accessible to the depressed .  god is so close to his depressed servants that it is as if he resided with the  crushed and lowly in spirit , to revive the spirit of the lowly ones and to revive the heart of the ones being crushed .  how comforting to know that  jehovah is near to those that are broken at heart  and those who are crushed in spirit he saves .  how can the depressed get comfort from god .  at any time of the day , god ' s worshippers have approach to the  hearer of prayer ,  who can help us to cope with distressing feelings and circumstances .  the bible urges us to pour out our hearts to him   do not be anxious over anything , but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving let your petitions be made known to god  and the peace of god that excels all thought will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of christ jesus .  what if feelings of unworthiness make us think that our prayers are not being heard .  depression may cause us to conclude that our attempts to please god are not adequate .  however , our heavenly father is sensitive to our fragile emotions ,  remembering that we are dust .  even if  our hearts may condemn us ,  we can  persuade our hearts  that  god is greater than our hearts and knows all things .  what if we are too distraught to put our feelings into words .  when painful emotions are so overwhelming that rational speech is difficult , do not give up .  keep approaching  the father of tender mercies and the god of all comfort ,  knowing that he understands your feelings and needs .  maria , mentioned earlier in this series , says   at times , when i feel very confused , i do not know what to pray about .  but i know that god understands and helps me .  how does god answer our prayers .  the bible does not suggest that god removes all our difficulties now .  however , god does impart the strength to cope with  all things   including depression .  when i first suffered from depression ,  admits martina ,  i prayed for jehovah to heal me immediately because i thought i would not be able to bear it any longer .  now i am content to pray for strength each day .  the scriptures are a vital source of spiritual strength to help afflicted individuals to cope with depression .  she relates   i truly appreciate what the medical profession has done for me .  above all , though , i realize the spiritual and practical value of reading god ' s word .  i have made a habit of reading it .  no more depression  ever .  when jesus christ was on earth , he demonstrated his god - given power to cure painful maladies .  jesus was eager to bring relief to people who suffered from grievous sicknesses .  moreover , he himself knows the agony of distraught emotions .  on the night before he was to die a painful death ,  christ offered up supplications and also petitions to the one who was able to save him out of death , with strong outcries and tears .  as distressing as that was to jesus at the time , we benefit now because  he is able to come to the aid of those who are being put to the test .  the bible reveals that god purposes to remove all the distressing conditions that contribute to depression .  he promises   i am creating new heavens and a new earth  and the former things will not be called to mind , neither will they come up into the heart .  but exult , you people , and be joyful forever in what i am creating .  the  new heavens ,  god ' s kingdom , will restore the  new earth ,  a society of righteous people on earth , to perfect physical , emotional , and spiritual health .  all sicknesses will be wiped out permanently .  my voice you must hear .  do not hide your ear to my relief , to my cry for help .  you have drawn near in the day that i kept calling you .  you said   do not be afraid .  he always listens patiently as barbara sobs uncontrollably and repeats the same anguished thoughts she has expressed before .  gerard has learned to listen without being judgmental , argumentative , or condemning .  as the bible advises , he has learned to  speak consolingly to the depressed .  patiently he reassures barbara that she is very precious to jehovah god , to her family , and to her friends .  he usually reads one or two comforting passages from the bible , even though he has read some of them to her before .  then , without fail , he offers to say a prayer with her and her husband over the phone , something they always find very consoling .  gerard is very aware that he is not a trained physician , and he never tries to take over the role of barbara ' s doctors .  he does , however , complement her medical treatment with something few doctors give  consoling scriptures and comforting prayers .  to  speak consolingly to the depressed  you might say   i just wanted to let you know that i ' ve been thinking of you .  i know you don ' t always feel very well .  how have you been lately .  remember  speak sincerely and listen with empathy , even if the depressed person says the same things he or she has said before .  you might say   i am amazed at what you are able to do   despite your health limitations .  even if you wish you could do more , jehovah loves and appreciates you , and so do we .  remember  be compassionate and kind .  you might say   i came across this encouraging scripture .  or  i thought of you when i reread this favorite bible verse of mine .  then read or quote the verse .  remember  avoid a preachy tone .  do not gaze about , for i am your god .  i will fortify you .  i will really help you .  i will really keep fast hold of you with my right hand of righteousness .  this afflicted one called , and jehovah himself heard .  and out of all his distresses he saved him .  he firmly established my steps .  yet not one of them goes forgotten before god .  but even the hairs of your heads are all numbered .  have no fear  you are worth more than many sparrows .  at my tears do not keep silent .  new american standard bible . 
he had a long way to go before he would reach jezreel , and he was no young man .  yet , he ran on tirelessly , for  the very hand of jehovah  was upon him .  the energy coursing through his body was surely unlike any he had ever known .  why , he had just outpaced the team of horses that was pulling king ahab in his royal chariot .  imagine elijah blinking the raindrops from his eyes as he ran , thinking back over the most eventful day of his life .  without question , it was a glorious victory for elijah ' s god , jehovah , and for true worship .  far behind him , lost in the gloom of the storm , lay the windswept heights of mount carmel , where jehovah had used elijah to strike a mighty and miraculous blow against baal worship .  hundreds of baal prophets were exposed as wicked frauds and justly executed .  then elijah prayed to jehovah for an end to the drought that had afflicted the land for three and a half years .  the rains fell .  it may have seemed to him that a real turning point had come at last .  ahab would have to change .  after what he had witnessed , surely he had no choice but to abandon baal worship  to restrain his queen , jezebel  and to stop the persecution of jehovah ' s servants .  we may imagine that our lot in life will continue to improve , perhaps even thinking that our worst problems are finally behind us .  if elijah thought that way , no wonder , for he  was a man with feelings like ours .  actually , though , elijah ' s problems were far from over .  in fact , within hours elijah would be so fearful , so low in spirits , that he would wish to die .  what happened , and how did jehovah help his prophet to renew his faith and his courage .  we read   ahab told jezebel all that elijah had done and all about how he had killed all the prophets with the sword .  notice that ahab ' s account of the day ' s events left out elijah ' s god , jehovah .  a fleshly man , ahab saw the day ' s miraculous events in strictly human terms  what  elijah had done .  clearly , he had not learned to respect jehovah god .  and how did his vengeful wife react .  livid with rage , she sent this message to elijah   so may the gods do , and so may they add to it , if at this time tomorrow i shall not make your soul like the soul of each one of them .  this was a death threat of the worst kind .  in effect , jezebel was vowing that she herself should die if she could not have elijah killed within the day to avenge her baal prophets .  imagine elijah being awakened from sleep in some humble lodging in jezreel on that stormy night  only to hear the queen ' s messenger deliver those awful words .  how was he affected .  jezebel was undeterred .  a great many of elijah ' s faithful colleagues had already been executed on her orders , and now , it seemed , he was to be next .  what effect did jezebel ' s threat have on elijah .  the bible tells us   he became afraid .  did elijah picture in his mind ' s eye the terrible death that jezebel had in store for him .  if he dwelled on such thoughts , it is no wonder that his courage failed him .  at any rate , elijah  began to go for his soul   he ran for his life .  much later , the apostle peter had a similar problem .  for instance , when jesus enabled peter to join him in walking on water , the apostle began  looking at the windstorm .  he then lost his courage and started to sink .  the examples of elijah and peter thus teach us a valuable lesson .  if we want to maintain our courage , we must not let our mind dwell on the dangers that frighten us .  we need to keep our focus on the source of our hope and strength .  it is enough .  there he left his attendant behind and struck out into the wilderness alone .  the record says that he went  a day ' s journey ,  so we may picture him starting off at sunrise , evidently carrying no provisions with him .  depressed , spurred ever onward by fear , he struggled over the rough and wild terrain under the blazing sun .  as that glaring disk gradually reddened and sank to the horizon , elijah ' s strength gave out .  exhausted , he sat down under a broom tree  the closest thing to shelter in that barren landscape .  he asked to die .  he said   i am no better than my forefathers .  he knew that his forefathers were then mere dust and bones in the grave , unable to do any good for anybody .  elijah felt just as worthless .  no wonder he cried out   it is enough .  why go on living .  not necessarily .  a number of faithful men and women in the bible record are described as feeling so sad that they wished for death  among them rebekah , jacob , moses , and job .  if you ever find yourself in such a dire situation , follow elijah ' s example in this respect  pour out your feelings to god .  after all , jehovah is  the god of all comfort .  did he comfort elijah .  we do not have to guess .  after elijah sank into sleep , jehovah sent an angel to him .  the angel gently woke elijah with a touch and said   rise up , eat .  elijah did so , for the angel had kindly set out a simple meal for him  fresh , warm bread along with water .  did he even thank the angel .  the record says only that the prophet ate and drank and went back to sleep .  was he too despondent to speak .  at any rate , the angel woke him a second time , perhaps at dawn .  once more , he urged elijah ,  rise up , eat ,  and he added these remarkable words ,  for the journey is too much for you .  he also knew that the journey would be too much for elijah to carry out in his own strength .  what a comfort to serve a god who knows our goals and our limitations better than we do .  how did elijah benefit from that meal .  that one meal did not make all his problems go away , but it sustained him miraculously .  imagine that older man trudging through the trackless wilderness day after day , week after week , for nearly a month and a half .  he provides for his servants spiritually .  learning about god from his word and from publications that are carefully based on the bible sustains us spiritually .  taking in such spiritual nourishment may not make all our problems go away , but it can help us endure what might otherwise be unendurable .  it also leads to  everlasting life .  it was a place of great significance , for there jehovah god through an angel had long before appeared to moses in the burning thornbush and there jehovah had later made the law covenant with israel .  elijah found shelter in a cave .  the question was likely spoken in a gentle way , for elijah took it as an invitation to pour out his feelings .  and pour them out he did .  he said   i have been absolutely jealous for jehovah the god of armies  for the sons of israel have left your covenant , your altars they have torn down , and your prophets they have killed with the sword , so that i only am left  and they begin looking for my soul to take it away .  elijah ' s words reveal at least three reasons for his low spirits .  despite years of being  absolutely jealous  in serving jehovah , putting god ' s sacred name and worship above all else , elijah saw that conditions seemed only to have grown worse .  the people were still faithless and rebellious , while false worship was running rampant .  second , elijah felt alone .  i only am left ,  he said , as if in that nation he were the last man who still served jehovah .  third , elijah was scared .  many of his fellow prophets had already been killed , and he was convinced that he was next .  it may not have been easy for elijah to admit to those feelings , but he did not let pride or embarrassment hold him back .  by opening his heart to his god in prayer , he set a good example for all faithful people .  the angel told elijah to stand at the mouth of the cave .  he obeyed , not knowing what was in store .  a mighty wind sprang up .  it must have emitted a deafening roar , for it was so powerful that it tore mountains and crags apart .  picture elijah trying to shield his eyes while clinging to his heavy , rustic garment of hair as the gusts whipped it about him .  then he had to struggle to keep his footing , for the very earth began to heave and toss  an earthquake shook the region .  he had barely recovered when a great fire swept through , forcing him back into the cave to shield himself from the searing heat .  elijah knew that jehovah was not some mythical nature god such as baal , who was hailed by his deluded worshippers as  the rider of the clouds ,  or bringer of rains .  jehovah is the real source of all the awesome power found in nature , but he is also vastly greater than anything he has made .  even the physical heavens cannot contain him .  how did all of this help elijah .  remember his fear .  with a god like jehovah on his side , a god who had all that overwhelming power at his disposal , elijah had nothing to fear from ahab and jezebel .  it invited elijah to express himself again , and he did so , pouring out his concerns a second time .  perhaps that brought him further relief .  undoubtedly , though , elijah found even more comfort in what the  calm , low voice  told him next .  jehovah reassured elijah that he was far from worthless .  god revealed much of his long - range purpose regarding the war against baal worship in israel .  clearly , elijah ' s work had not been in vain , for god ' s purpose was moving inexorably forward .  furthermore , elijah still figured in that purpose , for jehovah sent him back to work with some specific instructions .  jehovah did two things about that .  first , he told elijah to anoint elisha as the prophet who would eventually succeed him .  this younger man would become elijah ' s companion and helper for a number of years .  how practical that comfort was .  second , jehovah revealed this thrilling news   i have let seven thousand remain in israel , all the knees that have not bent down to baal , and every mouth that has not kissed him .  elijah was far from alone .  it must have warmed his heart to hear of those thousands of faithful people who refused to worship baal .  they needed elijah to keep up his faithful service , to set an example of unshakable loyalty to jehovah in those dark times .  elijah must have been deeply touched to hear those words through jehovah ' s messenger , the  calm , low voice  of his god .  creation vividly reflects the power of the creator .  jehovah still loves to use his limitless might to help his faithful servants .  however , god speaks most fully to us through the pages of his word , the bible .  in a sense , the bible can be like that  calm , low voice  if we let it guide us today .  in its precious pages , jehovah corrects us , encourages us , and reassures us of his love .  without a doubt .  soon he was back in action , once more the bold , faithful prophet who stood up against the wickedness of false worship .  if we likewise take to heart the inspired words of god ,  the comfort from the scriptures ,  we will be able to imitate the faith of elijah .  we might be reminded of the spirit emissary whom jehovah used to guide israel in the wilderness and of whom god said   my name is within him .  we cannot be dogmatic on this point , of course , but it is worth noting that in his prehuman existence , jesus served as  the word ,  the special spokesman to jehovah ' s servants .  to think about .  what events led elijah to become very low in spirits .  what feelings contributed to elijah ' s discouragement .  in what ways did jehovah comfort elijah .  how will you imitate elijah if you ever become discouraged .  what happened on the most eventful day of elijah ' s life .  why might elijah ' s hopes have been high as he made his way to jezreel .  what questions will we consider .  after the events on mount carmel , had ahab learned to respect jehovah more , and how do we know .  what message did jezebel send to elijah , and what did it mean .  what effect did jezebel ' s threat have on elijah , and what did he do .  how was peter ' s problem similar to that of elijah .  what lesson can we learn from elijah and peter .  describe elijah ' s journey and his state of mind as he fled .  what was the meaning of elijah ' s prayer to jehovah .  using the cited scriptures , describe the feelings of other godly individuals who became low in spirits .  if you ever find yourself feeling very low , in what respect should you follow elijah ' s example .  how did jehovah by means of an angel show loving concern for his troubled prophet .  why is it comforting that jehovah knows all about each one of us , including our limitations .  what did nourishment from jehovah enable elijah to do .  why should we appreciate the way that jehovah sustains his servants today .  where did elijah go , and why was that place significant .  jehovah ' s spirit messenger posed what question , and how did elijah respond .  elijah revealed what three reasons for his low spirits .  describe what elijah witnessed from the mouth of the cave on mount horeb .  what did jehovah ' s displays of power teach elijah .  how did the  calm , low voice  reassure elijah that he was far from worthless .  who might have been the source of the  calm , low voice .  in what two ways did jehovah address elijah ' s feelings of loneliness .  in what sense can we listen to jehovah ' s  calm , low voice  today .  why can we be sure that elijah accepted the comfort jehovah gave him .  it should have been a happy time  elkanah , her husband , customarily took the whole family on these annual journeys to worship at the tabernacle in shiloh .  jehovah meant for such occasions to be joyful .  and no doubt hannah , from her childhood on , had delighted in those festivals .  but things had changed for her in recent years .  however , elkanah had another wife .  her name was peninnah , and she seemed intent on making hannah ' s life miserable .  peninnah had figured out a way to make even these annual occasions a source of acute pain for hannah .  more to the point , how did hannah ' s faith in jehovah help her to cope with what often seemed like an impossible situation .  if you face challenges that sap you of joy in life , you may find hannah ' s story particularly moving .  why does your heart feel bad .  she had little control over the first and none at all over the second .  in the first place , she was in a polygamous marriage , with a rival wife who hated her .  in the second place , she was barren .  that condition is difficult for any wife who longs to bear children  but in hannah ' s time and culture , it was a source of intense grief .  each family counted on offspring to carry on the family name .  barrenness seemed a bitter reproach and shame .  polygamy was never an ideal situation .  rivalry , strife , and heartache were all too common .  the practice was far from the standard of monogamy that god had set in the garden of eden .  the bible thus paints a grim portrait of polygamy , and the poignant depiction of life within elkanah ' s household is one of the telling brushstrokes in that picture .  jewish tradition has it that he married hannah first and that peninnah came along some years later .  at any rate , peninnah , who was deeply jealous of hannah , found many ways to make her rival suffer .  peninnah ' s great advantage over hannah had to do with fertility .  peninnah produced one offspring after another , and her self - importance grew with each new child .  instead of feeling sorry for hannah and comforting her in her disappointment , peninnah played on that sensitive point .  the bible says that peninnah vexed hannah sorely  for the sake of making her feel disconcerted .  peninnah ' s actions were deliberate .  she wanted to hurt hannah , and she succeeded .  to each of peninnah ' s many children   all her sons and her daughters   elkanah gave portions of the sacrifices offered to jehovah .  beloved hannah , though , received a special portion .  jealous peninnah then so lorded it over hannah and reminded her of her barrenness that the poor woman gave way to weeping and even lost her appetite .  elkanah could not help but notice that his dear hannah was distressed and was not eating , so he attempted to comfort her .  hannah ,  he asked ,  why do you weep , and why do you not eat , and why does your heart feel bad .  am i not better to you than ten sons .  and hannah surely treasured his kind assurances of love .  but elkanah did not mention peninnah ' s malice  nor does the bible record suggest that hannah told him of it .  perhaps she saw that exposing peninnah would only make her own situation worse .  would elkanah really change things .  might not peninnah ' s contempt for hannah only deepen , and would not the children and the servants of that spiteful woman follow suit .  hannah would only feel more and more like an outcast in her own household .  his word reveals the whole picture , thus providing a solemn warning to any who indulge in seemingly minor jealous and hateful acts .  on the other hand , the innocent and the peaceable , like hannah , can find comfort in knowing that the god of justice sets all matters right in his own time and in his own way .  perhaps hannah knew as much , for it was to jehovah that she turned for help .  everyone was getting ready for the trip , even the children .  the trek would last a day or two on foot .  hannah knew how her rival wife would act .  however , hannah did not stay at home .  she thus set a worthy example for worshippers of god to this day .  it is never wise to let the misconduct of others interfere with our worship of god .  were we to do so , we would miss out on the very blessings that strengthen us to endure .  there it sat , on a hill nearly ringed by higher hills .  as they approached , hannah likely thought a great deal about what she would say in prayer to jehovah .  once they arrived , the family shared a meal .  hannah pulled away from the group as soon as she could and made her way to the tabernacle of jehovah .  high priest eli was there , sitting near the doorpost .  but hannah ' s focus was on her god .  here at the tabernacle , she felt confident that she would be heard .  if no one else could fully understand her plight , her father in heaven could .  her bitterness welled up within her , and she began to weep .  her lips quivered as she mentally formed the words to express her pain .  and she prayed at length , pouring out her heart to her father .  she did more , though , than just ask god to fulfill her desperate urge to bear offspring .  hannah was keen not only to receive blessings from god but also to give him what she could .  so she made a vow , saying that if she had a son , she would dedicate the child to a life of service to jehovah .  jehovah kindly invites his people to speak to him openly , without reservation , pouring out their concerns before him as a trusting child would to a loving parent .  the apostle peter was inspired to write these comforting words about prayer to jehovah   throw all your anxiety upon him , because he cares for you .  as hannah wept and prayed , she was startled by a voice .  it was eli , the high priest , who had been observing her .  he said   how long will you behave drunk .  put away your wine from upon you .  eli had noticed hannah ' s quivering lips , her sobs , and her emotional demeanor .  instead of inquiring what was wrong , he jumped to the conclusion that she was drunk .  nevertheless , she again set a praiseworthy example of faith .  she did not let a man ' s imperfections get in the way of her worship of jehovah .  she answered eli respectfully and explained her situation .  he replied , perhaps in a chastened and softer tone   go in peace , and may the god of israel grant your petition that you have asked of him .  the account reads   the woman proceeded to go on her way and to eat , and her face became self - concerned no more .  the jerusalem bible here reads   her countenance was no more sad .  hannah felt relieved .  she had , in a sense , transferred the weight of her emotional burden to shoulders infinitely broader and stronger than her own , those of her heavenly father .  is any problem too heavy for him .  no  not then , not now , not ever .  if we do so in faith , we too may find that our sadness is replaced by  the peace of god that excels all thought .  she had likely told him of her request and her commitment , for the mosaic law said that a husband had the right to nullify a vow made by his wife without his consent .  but that faithful man made no such move .  rather , he and hannah worshipped jehovah together at the tabernacle before heading homeward .  the account does not say , but the expression  self - concerned no more  suggests that hannah ' s spirits rose from that time forward .  at any rate , peninnah soon found that her spiteful conduct produced no effect .  the bible never mentions her name again .  she was pregnant .  in her joy , hannah never for a moment forgot where this blessing had come from .  when the boy was born , she chose the name samuel , which means  name of god  and evidently refers to calling on the divine name , as hannah had done .  that year , she did not join elkanah and the family for the trek to shiloh .  she stayed home with the child for three years , until he was weaned .  then she gathered her strength for the day on which she would have to part with her beloved son .  of course , hannah knew that samuel would be well cared for in shiloh , perhaps by the hands of some of the women who served at the tabernacle .  still , he was so young , and what mother does not long to be with her child .  nonetheless , hannah and elkanah brought the boy , not begrudgingly , but gratefully .  they offered sacrifices at god ' s house , and they presented samuel to eli , reminding him of the vow hannah had made there years earlier .  she praised jehovah for his marvelous use of power  his unmatched ability to humble the haughty , to bless the oppressed , and to end life or even to save it from death .  she praised her father for his unique holiness , his justice , and his faithfulness .  with good reason , hannah could say   there is no rock like our god .  jehovah is completely reliable and unchanging , a refuge for all the oppressed and downtrodden who turn to him for help .  though he surely missed her as he grew up , he never felt forgotten .  year after year , hannah would come back to shiloh , bringing a sleeveless coat for his service at the tabernacle .  every stitch bore evidence of her love and care for her son .  we can just picture her putting the new coat on the boy , smoothing it out , and looking fondly at him while speaking kind , encouraging words .  samuel was blessed to have such a mother , and he grew up to be a blessing to his parents and to all of israel .  jehovah blessed her with fertility , and she bore elkanah five more children .  perhaps hannah ' s greatest blessing , though , was the bond between her and her father , jehovah , which grew ever stronger through the years .  may the same happen to you , as you imitate the faith of hannah .  footnotes  although the bible record says that jehovah had  closed up hannah ' s womb , '  there is no evidence that god was displeased with this humble and faithful woman .  the bible at times attributes to god events that he simply allowed to take place for a time .  the distance is based on the likelihood that elkanah ' s hometown , ramah , was the same place that came to be known as arimathea in jesus '  day .  to think about .  how did hannah show faith despite opposition .  how did hannah ' s prayers reveal her faith .  why does jehovah treasure such servants as hannah .  in what ways do you intend to imitate hannah ' s faith .  why was hannah unhappy when preparing for a trip .  what can we learn from hannah ' s story .  what two big problems did hannah face , and why did each present a challenge .  why did peninnah want hannah to suffer , and how did she hurt hannah .  despite elkanah ' s attempts to comfort hannah , why might she have held back from telling him the whole story .  did hannah ' s barrenness mean that jehovah was displeased with her .  when you face petty meanness or injustice , why is it comforting to remember that jehovah is the god of justice .  what lesson can we learn from hannah ' s willingness to make the trip to shiloh despite knowing how her rival would act .  why did hannah make her way to the tabernacle as soon as she could .  how did hannah pour out her heart to her heavenly father in prayer .  as hannah ' s example illustrates , what should we keep in mind when it comes to prayer .  how did eli jump to a wrong conclusion about hannah .  how did hannah ' s response to eli set a remarkable example of faith .  how was hannah affected by opening her heart to jehovah and worshipping him at the tabernacle .  how might we follow hannah ' s example when we struggle with negative feelings .  how did elkanah prove supportive regarding hannah ' s vow .  what power over hannah did peninnah lose .  what blessing did hannah receive , and how did she show that she appreciated where that blessing came from .  how did hannah and elkanah carry out the promise they had made to jehovah .  how did hannah ' s prayer to jehovah reflect the depth of her faith .  why can we be sure that samuel grew up knowing that his parents loved him .  how did jehovah further bless hannah .  consider just a few    hannah addressed the first of the two prayers to  jehovah of armies .  she is the first person in the bible record to be quoted as using that title .  note that hannah uttered the second prayer , not when her son was born , but when she and elkanah offered him up for god ' s service at shiloh .  so hannah ' s great joy lay , not in silencing her rival , peninnah , but in being blessed by jehovah .  when hannah said ,  my horn is indeed exalted in jehovah ,  she may have had in mind the ox , a powerful beast of burden that uses its horns mightily .  hannah was , in effect , saying   jehovah , you make me strong .  hannah ' s words about god ' s  anointed one  are considered prophetic .  the expression is the same one rendered  messiah ,  and hannah is the first person in the bible record to use it to refer to a future anointed king .  perhaps the only sound left was the whisper of a warm wind from the arabian desert .  job had run out of words , exhausted after a long debate .  picture him glaring at his three acquaintances , eliphaz , bildad , and zophar almost daring them to continue .  but they could only look down or away , frustrated that their clever arguments , their  blustery  words , and their hurtful insinuations had failed .  if anything , job was more determined than ever to defend his integrity .  job may have felt that integrity was all he had left .  he had lost his wealth , all ten of his children , the support and respect of his friends and neighbors , and finally his own health .  his skin was blackened with disease , encrusted with scabs , crawling with maggots .  even his breath was foul .  yet , the attacks of those three men had stirred up in job a fierce indignation .  he was bent on proving that he was not the corrupt sinner they said he was .  job ' s final speech had just silenced them .  their torrent of cruel words had finally run dry .  however , job ' s pain remained .  he still needed help desperately .  job ' s thinking , understandably , was out of balance .  he needed guidance and correction .  he also needed genuine consolation and comfort , the very things that his three acquaintances should have provided but did not .  have you ever felt in dire need of guidance and comfort .  have you ever been let down by people you thought were your friends .  learning how jehovah god helped his servant job and how job responded may fill you with hope and give you practical help .  a wise and kind counselor the account of job next reveals a surprise .  there was another person nearby , a younger man named elihu .  he had been there all along , silently listening to the older men debating .  and he was not at all happy with what he had heard .  elihu was upset with job .  it pained him to see righteous job allow himself to be goaded into  trying to prove himself right rather than god .  yet , elihu truly felt empathy for job he could see the man ' s pain , his sincerity , and his desperate need for kind counsel and comfort .  no wonder elihu ran out of patience with the three false comforters .  he had heard them attacking job , trying to undermine his faith , his dignity , and his integrity .  worse still , their twisted words declared god himself wicked .  elihu was fairly bursting with the urge to speak .  i am young ,  he said ,  and you men are aged .  so i respectfully held back , and i dared not tell you what i know .  but he could no longer keep silent .  he went on   age alone does not make one wise , nor is it only old men who understand what is right .  elihu then spoke at length , proving those words true .  he took a very different approach from that of eliphaz , bildad , and zophar .  elihu reassured job that he would not talk down to him or add to his pressures .  he also dignified job , addressing him by name and acknowledging that he had been treated with derision .  respectfully , he said   now , job , please hear my words .  elihu offered job some frank counsel   you said in my hearing , .  i am pure , without transgression  i am clean , without error .  but god finds reasons to oppose me .   '   elihu went right to the heart of the problem , asking   are you so convinced that you are right that you would say ,  i am more righteous than god '  .  he could not allow such reasoning to pass .  you are not right in saying this ,  the young man said .  elihu knew that job was filled with anger over his terrible losses and his mistreatment at the hands of his false friends .  but elihu cautioned job   take care that rage does not lead you into spitefulness .  elihu highlights jehovah ' s kindness above all , elihu spoke in defense of jehovah god .  powerfully he summarized a profound truth   it is unthinkable for the true god to act wickedly , for the almighty to do wrong .  the almighty does not pervert justice .  as an example of jehovah ' s merciful justice , elihu reminded job that jehovah had not stepped in and punished job for uttering rash and disrespectful words .  and rather than pretending to have all the answers , elihu humbly acknowledged   god is greater than we can know .  though his counsel was frank , elihu remained kind .  he spoke of a wonderful hope , that jehovah would one day restore job ' s health .  god would say of his loyal servant   let his flesh become fresher than in youth  let him return to the days of his youthful vigor .  another instance of elihu ' s kindness  instead of simply lecturing job , he kindly invited job to speak , to answer him .  speak ,  he said ,  for i want to prove you right .  but job did not answer .  perhaps he felt no need to defend himself against such kind , encouraging counsel .  perhaps he wept in relief .  we can learn a great deal from both of these faithful men .  from elihu we learn how to counsel and comfort those in need .  a true friend will not hold back from pointing out a serious fault or a dangerous course of action .  we want to be a friend like that , remaining kind and encouraging to those in need , even when they speak rashly .  and when we ourselves are in need of such counsel , job ' s example may remind us to listen humbly to counsel instead of dismissing it .  all of us need counsel and correction .  accepting it can save our life .  out of the windstorm  as elihu spoke , he often mentioned wind , clouds , thunder , and lightning .  he said of jehovah   listen carefully to the rumbling of his voice .  moments later elihu referred to a  storm wind .  it seems that as he spoke , a storm was brewing , growing steadily more intense .  finally , it was an all - out windstorm .  and then something far more dramatic happened .  jehovah spoke .  when reading the book of job , it is a wonderful relief to come to these marvelous chapters containing jehovah ' s speech to job .  it is as if a windstorm of truth were blowing away all the empty speeches , all the false words of eliphaz , bildad , and zophar .  jehovah did not even address those men until later .  his focus was on job alone  he firmly addressed his beloved servant as a father would correct a son .  jehovah knew job ' s pain .  and he felt pity for the man , as he always does when his beloved children suffer .  but he knew , too , that job had been  speaking without knowledge ,  making his own problems worse .  so jehovah corrected job by questioning him extensively .  where were you ,  he began ,  when i founded the earth .  tell me , if you think you understand .  at the dawn of creation ,  the morning stars ,  god ' s family of angels , shouted in applause over the wonders of creation .  job , of course , knew nothing of this .  jehovah went on to speak of his creative works .  in a sense , he gave job a brief tour of what humans today might call the natural sciences , touching on such subjects as astronomy , biology , geology , and physics .  in particular , jehovah described a number of animals then found in job ' s part of the world the lion , the raven , the mountain goat , the wild donkey , the wild bull , the ostrich , the horse , the falcon , the eagle , behemoth   , and finally leviathan .  imagine the privilege of attending a lecture about the natural world delivered by the creator of the universe .  teaching about humility and love what was the point of all of this .  job urgently needed a dose of humility .  by complaining of what he thought was mistreatment at jehovah ' s hand , job was only increasing his own pain , distancing himself from his loving father .  so jehovah asked again and again where job was when such marvels came into existence and whether job could feed , control , or tame the creatures he had made .  if job could not master even the basic elements of jehovah ' s creation , how could he presume to judge the creator .  were not jehovah ' s ways and thoughts far beyond the scope of job ' s limited view .  in all that jehovah said , there was also a strong undercurrent of love .  it is as though jehovah were reasoning with job   my son , if i can create and care for all these things , do you really think that i will fail to care for you .  would i really abandon you , rob you of your children , your security , your health .  am i not the only one who can restore your losses and heal your terrible pain .   '  job spoke only twice in answer to jehovah ' s probing questions .  he did not argue , justify himself , or make excuses .  he humbly acknowledged how little he really knew , and he repented of his rash words .  here we see job ' s faith in the finest light .  after all that he had endured , he remained a man of great faith .  he accepted jehovah ' s correction and took it to heart .  we may thus be moved to ask ourselves a probing question ,  am i humble enough to accept correction and counsel .   '  we all need such help .  when we accept it , we are imitating the faith of job .  you have not spoken the truth about me  jehovah now took action to comfort job in his pain .  addressing eliphaz , evidently the eldest of the three false comforters , jehovah said   my anger burns against you and your two companions , for you have not spoken the truth about me as my servant job has .  think about those words .  was jehovah saying that everything those three men had said was false or that every word that job had uttered was correct .  of course not .  however , there was a vast difference between job and his accusers .  job was brokenhearted , racked with grief , and stung by false accusations .  thus , it is understandable that he would speak rashly at times .  however , eliphaz and his two friends did not bear such burdens .  weak in their own faith , they spoke deliberately and arrogantly .  not only did they attack an innocent man , but worse , they misrepresented jehovah himself , in effect painting him as a harsh , even wicked , god .  little wonder , then , that jehovah demanded a price from those men .  they had to sacrifice seven bulls and seven rams no small matter , for the bull was later designated in the mosaic law as the sacrifice that the high priest would have to offer if his sin brought guilt on the whole nation .  it was the costliest of the animals offered as a sacrifice under that law .  what is more , jehovah said that he would accept the offering of job ' s accusers only if job first prayed in their behalf .  how it must have soothed job ' s heart to be vindicated by his god and see jehovah ' s justice prevail .  jehovah was confident that job would do as he asked him to , forgiving those men who had hurt him so deeply .  and job did not disappoint his father .  his obedience was the greatest proof of his integrity , far more powerful than words .  and it paved the way for the greatest blessings of job ' s life .  very tender in affection  jehovah was  very tender in affection and merciful  with job .  jehovah restored job to health .  imagine how job felt when he realized that his flesh had , indeed , become  fresher than in youth  as elihu had foretold .  his family and friends rallied around him at last , extending sympathy and gifts .  jehovah restored job ' s wealth , giving him twice the possessions he had before .  and what of the deepest of wounds the loss of his children .  job and his wife found a measure of comfort in becoming parents to ten more children .  and jehovah miraculously extended job ' s life .  finally ,  we read ,  job died , after a long and satisfying life .  and in paradise , job and his dear wife will be reunited with their family , including the ten children satan took from them .  why did jehovah reward job so richly .  the bible answers   you have heard of the endurance of job .  job endured more hardships than most of us can even imagine .  the word  endurance  tells us that job did more than just survive those trials .  he endured with his faith and his love for jehovah intact .  rather than turning hard and bitter , he remained willing to forgive even those who had deliberately hurt him .  and he never let go of his precious hope or his own prized possession , his integrity .  each of us needs to endure .  we can be sure that satan will try to discourage us as he did job .  but if we endure in faith , remaining humble , willing to forgive others , and determined to protect our integrity , we too may hold on to our precious hope .  nothing would frustrate satan more or delight the loving heart of jehovah more than if we were to imitate the faith of job .  footnotes  eliphaz , bildad , and zophar spoke a great many words to job enough to fill up some nine chapters of the bible yet , the record shows not a single instance when they addressed job by name .  at times , jehovah moves seamlessly from concrete , realistic descriptions to more figurative or poetic expressions .  in either case , god ' s aim was the same to help job increase his awe for his creator .  in fact , the apostle paul later quoted one statement eliphaz made , citing it as a truth .  eliphaz spoke a plain truth , but he misapplied it to job .  there is no record that job was required to offer a similar sacrifice in behalf of his wife .  imagine the privilege of attending a lecture about the natural world , delivered by the creator of the universe .  job did not argue with jehovah , justify himself , or make excuses  my servant job will pray for you .  little wonder that it has been called  the common cold of mental illness .  in recent years bipolar disorder has received greater public attention .  traits of this illness include severe mood swings that vacillate between depression and mania .  during the depressed phase ,  says a recent book published by the american medical association ,  you may be haunted by thoughts of suicide .  during the manic phase of your illness , your good judgment may evaporate and you may not be able to see the harm of your actions .  sheer numbers , though , cannot describe the tormenting experience of living with a mood disorder .  depression  overwhelming sadness most of us know what it is like to experience a wave of sadness .  in time  perhaps in just a matter of hours or days  the feeling subsides .  clinical depression , however , is far more serious .  in what way .  those of us who are not depressed know that the rides our emotions take us on eventually end ,  explains dr .  mitch golant ,  but the depressed individual experiences the ups and downs , twists and turns of his feelings as if on a runaway train without a clear sense of how or when  or even if  he can ever get off .  clinical depression can take many forms .  some people , for example , have what is called seasonal affective disorder   , which manifests itself during a particular time of year  usually winter .  people with sad report that their depressions worsen the farther north they live and the more overcast the weather ,  says a book published by the people ' s medical society .  while sad has been linked mainly to dark winter days , in some cases it ' s been associated with dark indoor work spaces , unseasonable cloudy spells and vision difficulties .  what causes clinical depression .  the answer is not clear .  while in some cases there seems to be a genetic link , in most instances life experiences appear to play an important role .  it has also been noted that it is diagnosed in twice as many women as men .  but this does not mean that men are unaffected .  when this type of depression strikes , it is all - pervasive and affects virtually every aspect of one ' s life .  it  shakes you to the core ,  says a sufferer named sheila ,  corroding your confidence , self - esteem , your ability to think straight and make decisions , and then when it reaches deep enough , it gives a few hard squeezes just to see if you can hold on .  there are times when a sufferer can gain much relief by talking out his or her feelings with an empathetic listener .  even so , it must be acknowledged that when biochemical factors are involved , depression cannot simply be willed away with a positive outlook .  really , in such a case , the dark moods of this illness are beyond the sufferer ' s control .  furthermore , the sufferer may be as baffled by the condition as family members and friends are .  consider paula , a christian who endured crippling episodes of intense sadness before her depression was diagnosed .  sometimes after christian meetings ,  she says ,  i would rush out to my car and weep , for no reason at all .  i just had this overwhelming sense of loneliness and pain .  although all the evidence showed that i had many friends who cared for me , i was blind to it .  something similar happened to ellen , whose depression required that she be hospitalized .  i have two sons , two lovely daughters - in - law , and a husband  all of whom i know love me very much ,  she says .  logic , it seems , would tell ellen that life is good and that she is precious to her family .  but on the battlefield of depression , dark thoughts  no matter how irrational  can overwhelm the sufferer .  not to be overlooked is the significant impact that one person ' s depression can have on the rest of the family .  when someone you love is depressed ,  writes dr .  golant ,  you may live with a chronic sense of uncertainty , never really knowing when your loved one will recover from a depressive episode or fall into a new one .  you can feel profound loss  even grief and anger  that life has deviated , maybe permanently , from the norm .  often , children can detect a parent ' s depression .  a depressed mother ' s child becomes highly attuned to his mother ' s emotional states , carefully observing every nuance and change ,  writes dr .  carol watkins notes that children of a depressed parent are  more likely to have behavioral problems , learning difficulties , and peer problems .  they are more likely to become depressed themselves .  bipolar disorder  consistently inconsistent clinical depression is indeed challenging .  but when mania is added to the equation , the result is called bipolar disorder .  the only consistent thing about bipolar disorder is that it is inconsistent ,  says a sufferer named lucia .  during mania , notes the harvard mental health letter , bipolar patients  can be unbearably intrusive and domineering , and their reckless and restless euphoria may suddenly change into irritability or rage .  lenore recalls her experience with the exhilaration of mania .  i was absolutely brimming over with energy ,  she says .  many called me a superwoman .  people would say ,  i wish i could be more like you .   '  i often felt a great sense of power , as though i could accomplish anything .  i exercised furiously .  i functioned on very little sleep  two or three hours a night .  yet , i woke up with that same high energy level .  in time , however , a dark cloud began to hover over lenore .  at the height of my euphoria ,  she says ,  i would feel an agitation from somewhere deep inside , a motor running that could not be shut off .  in a flash , my agreeable mood would become aggressive and destructive .  i would verbally pounce on a family member for no apparent reason .  i was furious , hateful , and completely out of control .  after this frightening display , i would suddenly become exhausted , tearful , and extremely depressed .  i felt worthless and wicked .  on the other hand , i might switch back to my amazingly cheerful self , as if nothing had ever happened .  the erratic behavior of bipolar disorder is a source of confusion to family members .  mary , whose husband suffers from bipolar disorder , states   it can be confusing to see my husband happy and talkative and then suddenly become despondent and withdrawn .  it ' s a real struggle for us to accept the fact that he has little control over this .  ironically , bipolar disorder is often just as distressful  if not more so  to the sufferer .  i envy people who have balance and stability in their lives ,  says a bipolar patient named gloria .  stability is a place that bipolar people visit .  none of us actually live there .  what causes bipolar disorder .  there is a genetic component  one that is stronger than that of depression .  in addition , having a close family member with bipolar depression may make you more vulnerable to major depression .  in contrast with depression , bipolar disorder seems to afflict men and women equally .  most often , it begins in young adulthood , but cases of bipolar disorder have been diagnosed in teenagers and even children .  nevertheless , analyzing the symptoms and arriving at the proper conclusion can be highly challenging even for a medical expert .  bipolar disorder is the chameleon of psychiatric disorders , changing its symptom presentation from one patient to the next , and from one episode to the next even in the same patient ,  writes dr .  francis mark mondimore of the johns hopkins university school of medicine .  it is a phantom that can sneak up on its victim cloaked in the darkness of melancholy but then disappear for years at a time  only to return in the resplendent but fiery robes of mania .  clearly , mood disorders are difficult to diagnose and can be even more difficult to live with .  but there is hope for sufferers .  footnotes  in part , this may be due to their susceptibility to postpartum depression as well as hormonal changes at menopause .  then , too , women are usually more inclined to seek medical attention and , hence , receive a diagnosis .  some names appearing in this series have been changed .  doctors report that often , each mood persists for many months .  however , they note , some  rapid cyclers  vacillate between depression and mania several times per year .  none of us actually live there .  also , some of the symptoms by themselves may be symptoms of other problems besides depression . 
the doctor assured us that the results were normal , but he kindly looked them up .  to his surprise , two of the results were above normal .  he apologized and called a specialist .  dad is doing well now .  but we are very glad that we asked questions .  medical appointments and hospital stays can be nerve - racking .  as maribel ' s experience shows , the assistance of a friend or a relative can be very helpful  possibly even life - saving .  how can you help a loved one .  before the visit .  help the patient write down his symptoms as well as any medications or supplements he takes .  also list any questions that should be asked of the physician .  help your friend recall any details of his condition or any family history of the illness .  do not assume that the doctor already knows those details or will ask for them .  during the visit .  be sure you and the patient understand what the doctor says .  ask questions , but avoid making assertions .  allow the patient to ask questions and to speak for himself .  pay attention , and take careful notes .  ask about treatment options .  in some cases , it may be wise to suggest to the patient that he get a second opinion .  after the visit .  review the appointment with the patient .  make sure that he gets the right medication .  encourage him to take the medication as prescribed and to inform the doctor immediately of any adverse reaction .  urge the patient to keep a positive outlook , and encourage him to follow any additional instructions , such as that he get follow - up treatment .  help him to learn more about his condition .  in the hospital be calm and alert .  a patient going into the hospital may feel worried and helpless .  by being calm and attentive , you can help everyone to relax and also to avoid making mistakes .  make sure that admittance forms are filled out correctly .  respect the patient ' s right to make informed medical decisions .  if he is too ill to do so , honor his previously written wishes and the authority of his next of kin or health - care agent .  take initiative .  do not be afraid to speak up .  your respectable appearance and good manners can move the medical team to take greater interest in the patient and can even move them to improve the quality of his care .  in many hospitals , patients are seen by various doctors .  you can help them by communicating what others on the staff have said .  you know the patient , so point out any changes you notice in his physical or mental state .  show respect and gratitude .  hospital staff often work under stressful conditions .  treat them as you would want to be treated .  show respect for their training and experience , confidence in their ability , and gratitude for their efforts .  such appreciation can encourage them to do their best .  no one can avoid getting sick .  but through forethought and practical assistance , you can help a friend or a relative make the best of a difficult situation .  footnote  laws and practices regarding a patient ' s rights and duties vary from place to place .  make sure that the patient ' s documents containing his medical wishes are complete and up - to - date . 
