how to deal with anxiety
can we really please god .  did you know . 
how to deal with anxiety
anxieties are everywhere .  the next day , stores had no food at all .  paul , zimbabwe .  my husband sat me down and said he was leaving us .  how could i bear the betrayal .  what would happen to my children .  janet , united states .  when the sirens go off , i run for cover and lie on the floor as the rockets explode .  hours later my hands still shake .  alona , israel .  we live in times of anxiety ,  critical times hard to deal with .  many are reeling from financial crises , family breakdown , war , deadly disease outbreaks , and natural or man - made disasters .  add to this a variety of personal worries   will the growth i discovered on my body turn out to be cancer .   '   what kind of world will my grandchildren grow up in .   '  not all anxiety is bad .  we naturally feel some stress before a test , a performance , or a job interview .  and a healthy fear of danger helps us to avoid harm .  but extreme or constant anxiety is destructive .  with good reason , then , jesus asked   who of you by being anxious can add one cubit to his life span .  indeed , worry lengthens no one ' s life .  jesus therefore advised   stop being anxious .  but how is that even possible .  the answer involves applying practical wisdom , nurturing real faith in god , and building a reliable hope for the future .  even if we do not now face dire circumstances , we may in the future .  so let us see how taking these steps has helped paul , janet , and alona to deal with anxiety .  but know this , that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here .  on this account i say to you  stop being anxious about your lives as to what you will eat or what you will drink , or about your bodies as to what you will wear .  does not life mean more than food and the body than clothing .  who of you by being anxious can add one cubit to his life span . 
how to deal with anxiety
anxiety about money
how to deal with anxiety  after runaway inflation struck in our country , food became expensive and scarce ,  relates paul , a husband and father of two .  we stood in lines for hours , but often the food ran out before we got to the front of the line .  people got terribly thin from hunger , and some collapsed in the street .  prices for basic needs soared into the millions , then billions .  finally , the local currency became valueless .  i lost my bank account , insurance , and pension .  paul paul was aware that , for his family to survive , he had to use  practical wisdom .  i was an electrical contractor , but i took whatever work i could find , at much less than normal pay ,  he explains .  some paid me in food or household goods .  if i was paid four bars of soap , i ' d use two and sell the others .  from those bags , i fed my family and several other families for a long time .  paul also knew that the most practical thing anyone can do is trust in god .  when we do what god commands , he helps us .  in regard to obtaining life ' s necessities , jesus said   stop being in anxious suspense  for .  your father knows you need these things .  tragically , god ' s great enemy , satan , has tricked most of the world into centering their lives around physical concerns .  people worry desperately about their needs , real and imagined , and strive anxiously to obtain things they do not really need .  many go into debt , learning the hard way that  the borrower is a slave to the lender .  some people make damaging decisions .  many neighbors left their family and network of friends to search for  greener pastures '  abroad ,  relates paul .  some went without proper immigration papers and were unable to find work .  they often found themselves hiding from the police and sleeping in the streets .  they did not give god an opportunity to help them .  but we resolved to face financial problems together as a family , with god ' s help .  paul continues   jesus said   never be anxious about the next day , for the next day will have its own anxieties .  each day has enough of its own troubles .   '  so my daily prayer was simply that god would  give us today our bread for this day '  in order for us to survive .  and he did help , just as jesus promised .  we didn ' t always get our first choice .  once , i got into a food line not knowing what was being sold .  when i got to the front , i saw that it was yogurt .  i don ' t like yogurt .  but it was food , so we ate yogurt that night .  i am grateful to god that during that entire period , my family never went to bed hungry .  god has promised   i will never leave you , and i will never abandon you .  but through our experiences we have learned that the most important antidote to anxiety is trust in god .  jehovah  will always help us as long as we keep seeking to do his will .   '  as a result , we are not afraid of facing difficult economic circumstances again .  god helps faithful ones to find their  bread for this day   we now understand clearly that what humans need to survive is , not work or money , but food .  we eagerly await the time when god ' s promise will be fulfilled   there will be an abundance of grain on the earth .   '  in the meantime ,  having food and clothing , we will be content with these things .   '  we draw strength from the bible ' s words   let your way of life be free of the love of money , while you are content with the present things .  for he has said   i will never leave you , and i will never abandon you .  so that we may be of good courage and say   jehovah is my helper  i will not be afraid .   '    it takes genuine faith to  walk with god '  as paul and his family are doing .  whether we now face a serious financial crisis or may face one in the future , paul ' s example of faith and practical wisdom teaches us important lessons .  but what if family problems are causing us anxiety .  my son , do not lose sight of them .  the rich one rules the poor , and the borrower is a slave to the lender .  let your way of life be free of the love of money , while you are content with the present things .  for he has said   i will never leave you , and i will never abandon you .  taste and see that jehovah is good  happy is the man who takes refuge in him .  this is the history of noah .  noah was a righteous man .  he proved himself faultless among his contemporaries .  noah walked with the true god .  give us today our bread for this day       so never be anxious about the next day , for the next day will have its own anxieties .  each day has enough of its own troubles .  there will be an abundance of grain on the earth  on the top of the mountains it will overflow .  his fruit will flourish as in leb a non , and in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth .  so , having food and clothing , we will be content with these things .  let your way of life be free of the love of money , while you are content with the present things .  for he has said   i will never leave you , and i will never abandon you .  what can man do to me . 
how to deal with anxiety
anxiety about family
how to deal with anxiety  shortly after my father died , my husband told me that he was seeing another woman ,  relates janet .  soon afterward , without further warning or good - bye , he emptied his closet and left me and our two children .  janet found a job , but her pay was not enough for her to keep their house .  and she has faced more than just financial concerns .  the crushing anxiety of all the new responsibilities that i now had to handle alone was overwhelming ,  she recalls .  i felt guilty that i could not provide as much for my children as other parents do .  and even now , i worry about how others view me and my children .  do they wonder if i did all i should have to preserve my marriage .  janet prayer helps janet tame her feelings and nurture her friendship with god .  nighttime is the hardest , when everything is so quiet and my anxious thoughts are so loud .  praying and reading the bible help me to sleep .   '  i have spent many nights in prayer and have felt jehovah ' s peace comfort me .  jesus '  reassuring words about prayer in his sermon on the mount apply to anxieties of all kinds   your father knows what you need even before you ask him .  and we do need to ask him .  prayer is the primary way we can  draw close to god .  the result of doing so .  he will draw close to you .  yes , prayer does more than simply make us feel better for having expressed our anxiety .  jehovah , the  hearer of prayer ,  also acts on behalf of all who seek him in faith .  that is why jesus taught his followers  always to pray and not to give up .  we must keep asking god for his direction and help , confident that he will reward our faith .  we need never doubt his desire or ability to act .  to  pray constantly  in this way shows we have genuine faith .  but what really is faith .  faith involves  coming to know  god as a person .  we do so first by absorbing god ' s thoughts through the bible .  we learn that he sees each of us and wants to help us .  yet , real faith involves more than just knowing something about god .  it also means having a bond of respectful friendship with him .  as is true with a human friend , we cannot forge such a bond overnight .  our faith  continues to increase  over time as we learn more about him , as we  do the things pleasing to him ,  and as we experience his active help .  that is the kind of faith that helps janet deal with anxieties .  what has truly helped build my faith is seeing jehovah ' s hand every step of the way ,  says janet .  many times we faced injustices that seemed impossible to deal with .  with much prayer , jehovah always made a way out for us that i never could have figured out on my own .  when i thank him , it reminds me of how much he has done for me .  he has always come through for us at the right time , often just in time .  and he has given me true friends who are genuine christian men and women .  they are always there for me and are good examples for my children .   '  for an innocent mate , it ' s the deepest of betrayals .  years have passed since my husband left , but at times i still feel hollow inside .  when i do , i try to do something to help someone else , and that always helps me too .  by thus applying the bible principle to avoid isolating herself , janet lowers her anxiety .  god is  a father of the fatherless and a protector of widows .   '  he will never abandon us as my husband did .  janet knows that god does not test us  with evil things .  on the contrary , he gives wisdom  generously to all  and gives  power beyond what is normal  to help us deal with our anxieties .  but what if we are anxious because our life is in danger .  available online at www .  so do not be like them , for your father knows what you need even before you ask him .  draw close to god , and he will draw close to you .  cleanse your hands , you sinners , and purify your hearts , you indecisive ones .  o hearer of prayer , to you people of all sorts will come .  then he went on to tell them an illustration about the need for them always to pray and not to give up ,      pray constantly .  this means everlasting life , their coming to know you , the only true god , and the one whom you sent , jesus christ .  no , we are not boasting outside our assigned boundaries about the labors of someone else , but we hope that as your faith continues to increase , what we have done may be made to increase , within our territory .  then we will abound still more ,      and the one who sent me is with me  he did not abandon me to myself , because i always do the things pleasing to him .  for i hate divorce ,  says jehovah the god of israel ,  and the one who covers his garment with violence ,  says jehovah of armies .  and guard yourselves respecting your spirit , and you must not deal treacherously .  whoever isolates himself pursues his own selfish desires  he rejects all practical wisdom .  a father of the fatherless and a protector of widows is god in his holy dwelling .  a father of the fatherless and a protector of widows is god in his holy dwelling .  so if any one of you is lacking in wisdom , let him keep asking god , for he gives generously to all and without reproaching , and it will be given him .  when under trial , let no one say   i am being tried by god .  for with evil things god cannot be tried , nor does he himself try anyone .  however , we have this treasure in earthen vessels , so that the power beyond what is normal may be god ' s and not from us .  no temptation has come upon you except what is common to men .  but god is faithful , and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear , but along with the temptation he will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it .  let us , then , approach the throne of undeserved kindness with freeness of speech , so that we may receive mercy and find undeserved kindness to help us at the right time . 
how to deal with anxiety
anxiety about danger
how to deal with anxiety  when i hear the siren , my heart starts racing and i run to a bomb shelter ,  says alona .  but even there i feel anxious .  it ' s worse when i ' m outside , with no place to hide .  once , while just walking down the street , i started to cry and couldn ' t breathe .  it took me hours to calm down .  then the siren went off again .  alona war is only one of many sources of danger .  for example , the discovery that you or a loved one has a life - threatening illness can make you feel as though you have been hit by a bomb .  and for others , fear of the future can cause anxiety .  they worry ,  will our children , or their children , have to live in a world of war , crime , pollution , climate change , and epidemics .   '  how can we deal with such anxieties .  knowing that bad things happen ,  the shrewd person sees the danger and conceals himself .  and just as we try to protect our physical well - being , we can take steps to shield our mental and emotional health .  violent entertainment and even news reports filled with horrific images add to our own and our children ' s anxiety .  to avoid unnecessary exposure to these things is not hiding our head in the sand .  god did not design our minds to dwell on evil .  instead , we should fill them with  whatever things are true , .  if we do ,  the god of peace  will give us peace of mind and heart .  real faith helps us to deal with anxiety .  the bible urges us to  be vigilant with a view to prayers .  we can ask god for his help and for the wisdom and courage to make the best of our situation , confident that  he hears us concerning whatever we are asking .  with her husband , avi the bible explains that satan , not god , is  the ruler of this world  and that  the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one .  therefore , jesus used no mere figure of speech when he taught us to pray   deliver us from the wicked one .  whenever the siren goes off , i ask jehovah to help me control my feelings ,  says alona .  also , my dear husband calls me and prays with me .  praying really helps .  it is as the bible says   jehovah is near to all those calling on him , to all who call on him in sincerity .  in his sermon on the mount , jesus taught his followers to pray   let your kingdom come .  god ' s kingdom will root out all harmful anxiety forever .  through jesus , the  prince of peace ,  god will bring  an end to wars throughout the earth .  he  god  will render judgment among many peoples .  nation will not lift up sword against nation , nor will they learn war anymore .  no one will make them afraid .  happy families  will build houses and live in them , and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage .  and no resident will say   i am sick .  today , despite all precautions , it is not always possible to prevent  unexpected events  or to avoid being in the wrong place at the wrong time .  as they have for centuries , war , violence , and disease continue to kill good people .  what hope do those innocent victims have .  countless millions , their number known only to god , will live again .  for now , they sleep , safe in god ' s perfect memory , until the day when  all those in the memorial tombs will .  speaking of the resurrection , the bible assures us   we have this hope as an anchor for the soul , both sure and firm .  and god  has provided a guarantee to all men by resurrecting  jesus  from the dead .  for now , even those who are trying to please god will face anxieties .  by taking practical steps , drawing close to god through prayer , and building faith in the bible ' s hope for the future , paul , janet , and alona are all dealing successfully with anxiety .  as he has in their case ,  may the god who gives hope fill you with all joy and peace by your trusting in him .  if after taking practical steps you find that anxiety continues to interfere with your daily life , you may want to consult a doctor .  when anxiety grows out of proportion to the problems or the stresses a person is facing , it may indicate a deeper problem .  your doctor may begin with a physical checkup , since anxiety is sometimes the result of an underlying medical condition .  from there the doctor may help you to decide on additional treatment .  christians should make sure that any treatment they pursue does not conflict with bible principles .  available online at www .  the shrewd person sees the danger and conceals himself , but the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences .  finally , brothers , whatever things are true , whatever things are of serious concern , whatever things are righteous , whatever things are chaste , whatever things are lovable , whatever things are well - spoken - of , whatever things are virtuous , and whatever things are praiseworthy , continue considering these things .  but the end of all things has drawn close .  therefore , be sound in mind , and be vigilant with a view to prayers .  and if we know that he hears us concerning whatever we are asking , we know that we are to have the things we ask for , since we have asked them of him .  now there is a judging of this world  now the ruler of this world will be cast out .  we know that we originate with god , but the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one .  and do not bring us into temptation , but deliver us from the wicked one .   '       jehovah is near to all those calling on him , to all who call on him in truth .  let your kingdom come .  let your will take place , as in heaven , also on earth .  for a child has been born to us , a son has been given to us  and the rulership will rest on his shoulder .  his name will be called wonderful counselor , mighty god , eternal father , prince of peace .  he is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth .  he breaks the bow and shatters the spear  he burns the military wagons with fire .  he will render judgment among many peoples and set matters straight respecting mighty nations far away .  they will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears .  nation will not lift up sword against nation , nor will they learn war anymore .  they will build houses and live in them , and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage .  and no resident will say   i am sick .  the people dwelling in the land will be pardoned for their error .  i have seen something further under the sun , that the swift do not always win the race , nor do the mighty win the battle , nor do the wise always have the food , nor do the intelligent always have the riches , nor do those with knowledge always have success , because time and unexpected events overtake them all .  we have this hope as an anchor for the soul , both sure and firm , and it enters in within the curtain ,      because he has set a day on which he purposes to judge the inhabited earth in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed , and he has provided a guarantee to all men by resurrecting him from the dead .  may the god who gives hope fill you with all joy and peace by your trusting in him , so that you may abound in hope with power of holy spirit . 
in various neighborhoods infamous for their street gangs and drugs .  my parents had six children , of whom i was the second .  my mother raised us as members of an evangelical church .  however , as a teenager , i led a double life .  on sundays i sang in the church choir .  during the rest of the week , i lived to party , abuse drugs , and commit sexual immorality .  i had a quick and violent temper .  i would use anything as a weapon to win .  what i learned at church did not help .  i used to say ,  vengeance is the lord ' s  and i ' m his instrument .  i joined a civil rights student union .  on several occasions we staged protests , each time temporarily closing the school .  it seemed that protesting did not satisfy my violent nature .  so i started participating in hate crimes .  for example , on occasion my friends and i saw films featuring the past suffering of african slaves in the united states .  incensed by those injustices , we assaulted white youths right there in the movie theater .  then we went to white neighborhoods , looking for more people to beat up .  by the time i was in my late teens , my brothers and i were confirmed hoodlums .  we got in trouble with the authorities .  one of my younger brothers was a member of a notorious gang , and i associated with them .  my life was going from bad to worse .  a friend of mine had parents who were jehovah ' s witnesses .  they invited me to their congregation meetings , and i accepted .  from the very start , i could see how different the witnesses were .  everyone had a bible and used it during the meeting .  young people even gave talks on the program .  i was impressed to learn that god has a name , jehovah , and to hear it used .  the congregation was made up of many nationalities , but it was obvious that there were no racial divisions .  initially , i did not want to study the bible with the witnesses , but i liked going to their meetings .  one night , while i was at a meeting of the witnesses , a group of my friends went to a concert .  there , they beat a teenager to death because he would not give up his leather jacket .  the next day , they bragged about the murder .  they even laughed off their crime when being tried in court .  most of them were sentenced to life in prison .  needless to say , i was very glad that i had not been with them that night .  i resolved to change my life and start studying the bible .  having been exposed to so much racial prejudice , i saw things among the witnesses that astounded me .  for example , when a white witness had to travel abroad , he left his children in the care of a black family .  also , a white family took into their home a black youth who needed a place to live .  i knew i had found a true brotherhood .  from studying the bible , i began to realize that i needed to change my thinking .  i had to make my mind over so that i not only acted peaceably but also saw this as the best way of life .  gradually , i made progress .  i had to make my mind over so that i not only acted peaceably but also saw this as the best way of life even after i was baptized , however , i had to keep working on my temper .  for example , on one occasion while going from house to house in the christian ministry , i chased after a thief who had just stolen the radio from my car .  as i got closer to him , he dropped the radio and ran away .  when i related to the others with me how i got my radio back , an elder in the group asked me ,  stephen , what would you have done if you had caught up with him .  that question made me think and motivated me to keep working at being peaceable .  later , i had the privilege of volunteering at the world headquarters of jehovah ' s witnesses in brooklyn , new york .  two years later , i married my dear wife , aarhonda .  she was a great support to me as we cared for my mother until mother ' s death .  in time , aarhonda and i attended the watchtower bible school of gilead and were assigned to panama , where we continue to serve as missionaries .  since baptism , i have faced a number of potentially explosive situations .  i ' ve learned either to walk away from people who are trying to provoke me or to defuse the situation in other ways .  many people , including my wife , have commended me on how i have handled these situations .  i ' ve even surprised myself .  i do not take credit for these changes in my personality .  rather , i believe that they are testimony to the transforming power of the bible .  the bible has given my life purpose and taught me to be truly peaceable .  i don ' t beat people up anymore  rather , i help them heal spiritually .  i even studied the bible with a previous enemy from high school .  after he was baptized , we became roommates for a time .  to this day , we are close friends .  i am profoundly grateful to jehovah for giving me a life full of meaning and happiness amid a true brotherhood .  may people know that you , whose name is jehovah , you alone are the most high over all the earth .  by this all will know that you are my disciples if you have love among yourselves .  and stop being molded by this system of things , but be transformed by making your mind over , so that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of god .  for the word of god is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two - edged sword and pierces even to the dividing of soul and spirit , and of joints from the marrow , and is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart . 
have you ever read about people who are described in the bible in glowing terms and said to yourself ,  i can ' t be like them .   '  you might reason ,  i ' m not blameless or righteous , and i definitely don ' t always do what is right .   '  job was  a blameless and upright man .  lot was called a  righteous man .  and david was said to do  what was right  in god ' s eyes .  however , let us take a closer look at the lives of those bible characters .  we will see that   they made mistakes ,   we can learn much from their example , and   imperfect humans really can please god .  god  rescued righteous lot , who was greatly distressed by the brazen conduct of the lawless people .  he got the wrong idea , concluding that god did not care whether he kept his faith in him or not .  job was so convinced of his own righteousness that to others it sounded as though he were proclaiming himself more righteous than god .  lot hesitated to make what should have been a clear and simple decision .  he was greatly distressed by the gross immorality of the people living in sodom and gomorrah , even  tormenting his righteous soul  over their behavior .  god announced that he intended to destroy those wicked cities and gave lot an opportunity to be rescued along with his family .  you might imagine that troubled lot would be the first one to leave .  at this crucial moment , though , he lingered .  the angels sent to rescue him and his family had to grab hold of their hands and take them out of the city to safety .  david  walked after  god  with all his heart , doing only what was right in  god ' s  eyes .  shockingly , in an attempt to cover it up , david had her husband killed .  the bible says that what david did  was very displeasing to jehovah .  job , lot , and david all made mistakes , some very serious ones at that .  but , as we will see , they were wholehearted in their desire to serve god obediently .  they were willing to show that they were sorry and to change their ways where needed .  hence , god looked on them with favor , and overall the bible refers to them as faithful men .  as imperfect humans , we cannot avoid making mistakes .  but when we do , we need to show that we are sorry and then do what we can to put matters right .  how did job , lot , and david try to put their mistakes right .  at heart , job was a man of integrity .  after god reasoned with him , job corrected his wrong thinking and took back what he had said .  lot ' s view of the immoral conduct of people in sodom and gomorrah completely agreed with god ' s standards .  it was his temporary lack of urgency that was the problem .  he eventually fled the condemned cities and escaped god ' s judgment .  obediently he did not even look back at what he was leaving behind .  although david made a serious mistake in breaking god ' s law , he revealed what was truly in his heart by sincerely repenting and throwing himself on god ' s mercy .  god ' s favorable view of those men is in accord with his reasonable expectations for imperfect humans .  god  well knows how we are formed , remembering that we are dust .  so , if god knows we cannot avoid making mistakes , what does he expect of us .  god  well knows how we are formed , remembering that we are dust .  you , solomon my son , know the god of your father and serve him with a complete heart .  what is a complete heart .  it is a heart that loves god and is resolved to be sensitive to his will and requirements .  it is not a heart that is perfect , but it is one that yearns to serve god obediently and is willing to be corrected .  love of god and a desire to be obedient marked job as  blameless ,  lot as  righteous ,  and david as  doing only what was right  in god ' s eyes .  although they made mistakes , they were able to please god .  a complete heart is sensitive to god ' s will and motivated by a strong desire to serve him obediently so if we have bad thoughts that we wish had not come into our mind or say something we are ashamed of or do things that we later realize are wrong , let us take courage from the examples just discussed .  god knows perfection is beyond our reach at this time .  he does , however , expect us to love him and to strive for obedience .  if we have a complete heart in this regard , we can be confident that we can please god too .  there was a man in the land of uz whose name was job .  he was an upright man of integrity  he feared god and shunned what was bad .  there was a man in the land of uz whose name was job .  he was an upright man of integrity  he feared god and shunned what was bad .  for day after day that righteous man was tormenting his righteous soul over the lawless deeds that he saw and heard while dwelling among them .  then i ripped the kingdom away from the house of david and gave it to you .  but you have not become like my servant david , who kept my commandments and who walked after me with all his heart , doing only what was right in my eyes .  and he rescued righteous lot , who was greatly distressed by the brazen conduct of the lawless people       if i were in the right , my own mouth would condemn me  even if i keep my integrity , he will declare me guilty .  that is why i say ,  he destroys the innocent and the wicked alike .   '       so these three men stopped trying to answer job , because he was convinced of his own righteousness .  his anger blazed against job for trying to prove himself right rather than god .  for day after day that righteous man was tormenting his righteous soul over the lawless deeds that he saw and heard while dwelling among them .  as dawn was breaking , the angels became urgent with lot , saying   get up .  take your wife and your two daughters who are here with you , so that you will not be swept away in the error of the city .  then i ripped the kingdom away from the house of david and gave it to you .  but you have not become like my servant david , who kept my commandments and who walked after me with all his heart , doing only what was right in my eyes .  as soon as the mourning period was over , david sent for her and brought her to his house , and she became his wife and bore him a son .  but what david had done was very displeasing to jehovah .  for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of god ,      that is why i take back what i said , and i repent in dust and ashes .  for he well knows how we are formed , remembering that we are dust .  for he well knows how we are formed , remembering that we are dust .  and you , sol o mon my son , know the god of your father and serve him with a complete heart and with a delightful soul , for jehovah searches through all hearts , and he discerns every inclination of the thoughts .  if you search for him , he will let himself be found by you , but if you leave him , he will reject you forever . 
did you know .  hand mills were used to grind grain into flour to make bread .  use of such mills was a daily chore for the women or the servants of virtually every household .  the sound of grinding was associated with everyday life in ancient times .  artifacts from ancient egypt illustrate the process .  grain was placed on a slightly concave , horizontal stone surface , sometimes called a saddle - quern .  the grinder knelt in front of the fixed quern while grasping with both hands a smaller grinding stone , or rider , which was moved back and forth over the horizontal surface to grind the grain .  according to one source , such riders typically weighed between four and nine pounds .  if used as a weapon , such a stone could be deadly .  grinding cereals was so essential to a family ' s well - being that a biblical law forbade seizure of a millstone as a pledge .  the bible says that jesus is  in the bosom position with the father .  this expression refers to the particular closeness and favor that jesus has with god .  these words allude to the custom that the jews followed when dining .  in jesus '  day , the jews reclined on couches arranged around the dinner table .  each diner ' s head was positioned toward the table and his feet away from it , while he supported himself on a cushion with his left elbow .  this posture allowed his right arm to remain free .  since the diners all lay on their left side , one beside the other ,  the head of one man was near the breast of the man who lay behind him ,  explains one source ,  and he was , therefore , said  to lie in the bosom '  of the other .  to lie in the bosom of the head of a family or of the host of a feast was considered to be a special honor or privilege .  hence , at jesus '  last passover , it was  the disciple whom jesus loved ,  the apostle john , who lay in jesus '  bosom .  john could thus  lean back on jesus '  chest '  to ask him a question .  they shut themselves in and climbed onto the roof of the tower .  he approached the entrance of the tower to set it on fire .   '   so his attendant ran him through , and he died . 
bible questions answered
who tried to make jesus do something bad .  why , then , do we often see violence , injustice , and cruelty .  horrific news reports are common .  is there someone trying to make people act badly .  did god make humans with an evil tendency .  no , jehovah god created humans in his image , with a tendency to imitate god ' s love .  but god also dignified humans with free choice .  when our first parents chose to act badly , they rejected god ' s example and became imperfect .  we inherited the tendency to sin from them .  god wants us to resist our bad tendencies .  so he teaches us how to avoid doing wrong and how to find real happiness .  at present , though , we cannot imitate god ' s love perfectly .  although evil abounds now , god is permitting it for a limited time to allow all to see its sad consequences .  soon , however , the earth will be filled with happy people who obey god .   , published by jehovah ' s witnesses also available at www .  org     again the devil took him along to an unusually high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory .  for it is written   it is jehovah your god you must worship , and it is to him alone you must render sacred service .  a god of faithfulness who is never unjust  righteous and upright is he .  they are not his children , the defect is their own .  they are a crooked and twisted generation .  i will give you advice with my eye upon you . 
cover subject are you in control of your life .  when you were younger , what were your life goals .  perhaps you wanted to marry , perfect a certain skill , or pursue an exciting career .  but life does not always turn out the way we plan .  unexpected challenges can throw life completely off course .  that is what happened to anja , delina , and gregory .  delina , in the united states , suffers from a neuromuscular disorder called dystonia .  in addition , she cares for three disabled siblings .  gregory , in canada , copes with a crippling anxiety disorder .  despite their circumstances , anja , delina , and gregory have been able to take control of their lives .  a bible proverb states   if you become discouraged in times of trouble , your strength will be meager .  the implication is clear  attitude makes a difference .  people who succumb to negativity relinquish the little control they still have , while those with a positive mind - set often summon the strength to put themselves back in the driver ' s seat .  consider how that proved true for anja , delina , and gregory .  the challenge  unchangeable circumstances has your life been taken over by a chronic illness .  the loss of a loved one .  when confronted with unchangeable circumstances , you may feel unable to do anything but wish your situation would change .  how can you regain control of your life .  bible example  paul the apostle paul traveled extensively as a zealous first - century missionary .  but his travels came to a halt when he was unjustly arrested and then confined to a house under soldier guard for two years .  rather than succumb to despair , paul focused on what he could do .  he gave spiritual help and comfort to all who came to visit him .  he even wrote several of the letters that are now part of the bible .  what anja does as mentioned in the preceding article , anja is housebound .  cancer has influenced every aspect of my life ,  she says .  i can ' t afford to risk infection right now , so my secular work and social life are all but nonexistent .  how does anja cope with her unchangeable circumstances .  creating a new routine was the key for me ,  she says .  i prioritized what was most important to me and made a schedule with my limited abilities in mind .  this has given me a sense of control .  what you can do if unchangeable circumstances seem to be controlling your life , try the following    focus on what you can control .  for example , you may not have full control over your health , but can you exercise , eat healthful food , and get sufficient rest .  clarify what you would like to accomplish in life .  break it down into small steps .  try to spend at least a little time each day working toward your goals .  do tasks , even small ones , that give you a sense of control .  clean the kitchen table , and wash the dishes .  dress neatly .  do the most important tasks first thing in the morning .  look at the possible benefits of your circumstances .  for example , does your situation give you greater insight into ways of coping with difficulties .  can you use this insight to help others .  bottom line  you may not be able to control your circumstances , but you may be able to control your response to them .  the challenge  overwhelming demands the children need your attention now .  so does your employer .  your spouse is calling .  all this while you are trying to care for your ailing parent .  this is not the life you planned , but it consumes you every day .  what can i do .  people need me .  responding to their every demand may not be in your best interests or theirs .  how can you regain control .  bible example  moses by acting as sole judge of israel in bible times , moses may have felt he was simply doing what was needed .  but his father - in - law told him   what you are doing is not good .  you will surely wear out .  he suggested that moses delegate much of the judging to capable men who would , in turn , bring only the hardest cases to moses .  moses '  father - in - law assured him   you will be able to stand the strain , and everyone will go home satisfied .  what delina does as mentioned in the opening article , delina suffers with dystonia , a neuromuscular disorder .  she also cares for her three disabled siblings .  i ' ve found that taking one day at a time and avoiding procrastination reduces stress ,  she says .  being open about my situation has resulted in my receiving assistance from others , including my husband .  also , i take a little time each morning for gardening something that brings me a lot of satisfaction .  what you can do if overwhelming demands control your life , try the following    see if you can enlist the aid of others .  for example , do you have children living at home who can help .  are there family members or friends living nearby who could give you assistance .  make your needs known .  for example , talk to your employer if his demands are unreasonable .  that does not mean you have to give him an ultimatum .  simply make him aware of what you are up against .  he may be willing to adjust your load .  keep track of the number of demands you face in a week .  can any of them be delegated to others .  be selective about accepting social invitations .  if you cannot attend because of a lack of time or energy , kindly say no .  bottom line  if you try to do everything , you may render yourself unable to do anything .  the challenge  negative feelings do strong feelings perhaps sadness , anger , or resentment consume you .  if so , you may have little time or energy to pursue what is truly important to you .  what can you do about it .  bible example  david king david was subject to a wide range of emotions including anxiety and sorrow .  what helped him to keep functioning .  david left matters in god ' s hands .  he also wrote his feelings down .  and as a man of faith , he prayed frequently .  what gregory does as mentioned in the opening article , gregory suffers from an anxiety disorder .  my excessive worrying was out of proportion and out of control ,  he says .  how did gregory regain control .  to get perspective ,  he says ,  i accepted the kind help of my wife and friends .  i also sought professional assistance and learned more about my condition .  after making some lifestyle changes , i began to feel that i was in control of my condition , not that it was in control of me .  although i still experience bouts of anxiety , i now have a better sense of what triggers them , and i know how to manage my disorder .  what you can do if negative feelings control your life , try the following    write down your feelings in a journal .  express your feelings to a close relative or friend .  challenge your feelings .  for example , ask yourself ,  is there really evidence to support such a negative view of myself .   '    do not hold on to anxiety , anger , or resentment .  redirect your energies to something more productive .  bottom line  often , negative feelings are not the result of our circumstances but of how we view them .  footnotes  some negative emotions can be the result of a health problem that may need professional treatment .  does not endorse any particular approach .  each individual should carefully evaluate his or her options before making a personal decision .  many psalms in the bible are prayers of david , which he put into writing .  are you in control of your life .  can you control your life .  there is a saying , life is not a matter of holding good cards but of playing a poor hand well .  today , no one has been dealt a perfect set of circumstances .  often the secret to gaining control is learning both to accept those circumstances and to work within the limitations that they impose .  if you can reclaim some control of your life despite unfortunate circumstances , that is good .  if your circumstances eventually improve , that is better .  but the best is yet to come .  the bible promises a time when all people will be able to have a satisfying measure of control over their life .  they will be able to live to their full potential , uninhibited by frustrating circumstances , daily pressures , and negative feelings .  the bible refers to this as  the real life .  can you be part of that future .  can you be confident that it will come .  for more information , visit our website at www .  they will not build for someone else to inhabit , nor will they plant for others to eat .  for the days of my people will be like the days of a tree , and the work of their hands my chosen ones will enjoy to the full . 
i am overcome by feelings of dread , anxiety , and mental confusion .  isabella , a panic disorder sufferer in her forties .  anxiety can be described as  a feeling of nervousness or worry .  have you , for example , ever felt nervous when confronted by an angry dog .  what happens when the dog goes away .  the nervousness and worry do too , don ' t they .  what , though , is an anxiety disorder .  when anxiety becomes chronic , when it continues even after there is no more need to feel anxious , anxiety can become a disorder .  according to the u .  in a given year .  consider isabella , quoted in the introduction .  unrelenting anxiety , such as she experiences , can have serious consequences for the sufferer .  not only that , but the immediate family may also be affected adversely .  there is good news , though .  an nimh publication states   effective therapies for anxiety disorders are available , and research is uncovering new treatments that can help most people with anxiety disorders lead productive , fulfilling lives .  family and friends can also help one who is suffering from an anxiety disorder .  how to help be supportive  monica , who suffers from generalized anxiety disorder and post - traumatic stress disorder , explains a difficulty she faces   most people find it hard to understand my emotional problems .  as a result , anxiety disorder sufferers are often so afraid of being misunderstood that they try to hide their problem from others .  this can result in feelings of guilt that worsen their emotional state .  it is vitally important , therefore , for family and friends to be supportive .  learn more about the disorder  this suggestion may be especially appropriate for those who deal closely with sufferers of anxiety disorders .  this may include an immediate family member or a particularly close friend .  keep comforting one another  the first - century missionary paul urged friends in the greek city of thessalonica to  keep comforting one another and building one another up .  we can do this both by our words and our tone of voice .  we need to show that we deeply care for our friends , and we need to avoid hurtful insinuations .  consider the three professed friends of the man job , after whom a book in the bible is named .  those men , as you may remember , wrongly implied that job was in some way covering over concealed sins and that his suffering was the result of his cover - up .  so , be sensitive to a sufferer ' s feelings .  listen carefully .  try to view matters through the eyes of the one who is suffering , rather than through your own .  do not jump to conclusions while listening .  job ' s professed friends did , and as a result , they were called  troublesome comforters .  they actually made him feel worse .  remember to listen carefully to sufferers .  allow them to express freely how they feel .  this may help you to understand better what they are going through .  and think of the reward .  you may be able to help sufferers enjoy a more full and meaningful life .  consider five types of such disorders .  panic disorders recall isabella , mentioned in the introduction of our article .  it is not only the attacks of anxiety that she finds disabling .  in between them , there is the dread that an attack is going to happen again ,  she says .  as a result , sufferers tend to avoid places where they have had an attack .  some become so restricted that they are housebound or are able to confront a feared situation only when accompanied by someone they trust .  isabella explained   merely being alone is enough to trigger an attack .  mother gives me security  i can ' t stand it if she is not nearby .  obsessive - compulsive disorder a person obsessed with germs or dirt may develop a compulsion to wash his hands over and over again .  regarding a similar compulsion , renan says   my mind is in constant turmoil as i go over and over past mistakes , reanalyzing them and looking at them from every possible angle .  the result is an obsession to confess past mistakes to others .  renan is in constant need of reassurance .  but medication has been of help in controlling his obsession .  post - traumatic stress disorders   in recent times this term has been used to describe a range of psychological symptoms people may experience following an extremely traumatic event that involved physical harm or the threat of such .  ptsd sufferers may startle easily , be irritable , become emotionally numb , lose interest in things they once enjoyed , and have trouble feeling affection for others especially those with whom they used to be close .  some become aggressive , even violent , and tend to avoid situations that remind them of the original traumatic incident .  social phobia , or social anxiety disorder this is a term used to identify people who are overwhelmingly anxious and excessively self - conscious in everyday social situations .  some sufferers have an intense , persistent fear of being watched and judged by others .  they may worry for days or weeks before attending an event .  their fear may become so severe that it interferes with work , school , or other ordinary activities and makes it hard for them to make and keep friends .  generalized anxiety disorder monica , mentioned earlier , suffers from this disorder .  she goes through the day filled with  exaggerated worries ,  even though there is little or nothing to provoke them .  sufferers tend to anticipate disaster and are overly concerned with health issues , money , family problems , or difficulties at work .  just the thought of getting through the day may produce anxiety .  footnotes  awake .  does not endorse any specific medical treatment .  the above material is based on a publication of the national institute of mental health of the u .  department of health and human services . 
at the start of the year , at the time when kings go on campaigns , david sent jo ab and his servants and the entire army of israel to bring the am mon ites to ruin , and they besieged rab bah , while david stayed in jerusalem .  from the rooftop he saw a woman bathing , and the woman was very beautiful .  so she came in to him , and he lay down with her .  afterward , she returned to her house .  so jo ab sent u ri ah to david .  when u ri ah left the king ' s house , the king ' s courtesy gift was sent after him .  at that david said to u ri ah   have you not just returned from a journey .  why did you not go down to your own house .  so should i go into my own house to eat and drink and lie down with my wife .  as surely as you live and are alive , i will not do this thing .  so u ri ah stayed in jerusalem on that day and the following day .  but in the evening , he went out to sleep on his bed with the servants of his lord , and he did not go down to his house .  then retreat from behind him , so that he will be struck down and die .  did you not know that they would shoot from the top of the wall .  was it not a woman who threw an upper millstone on him from the top of the wall , causing his death at the bez .  why did you have to go so close to the wall .   '  then say ,  your servant u ri ah the hit tite also died .  intensify your battle against the city and conquer it .   '  and encourage him .  but what david had done was very displeasing to jehovah .  to the director .  a melody of david , when nathan the prophet came in to him after david had relations with bath - she ba .  blot out my transgressions according to your great mercy .  therefore , you are righteous when you speak , you are right in your judgment .  i was born guilty of error , and my mother conceived me in sin .  you find pleasure in truth in the inner person  teach my innermost self true wisdom . 
