how to enjoy your work
do not interpretations belong to god . 
how to enjoy your work alex sighs as he lifts another box onto the truck of the moving company he works for .  why am i stuck in this dead - end job .   '  he asks himself .  when am i going to hit it big .  my life would be so much better if i didn ' t have to work .   '  like alex in this scenario , many today do not enjoy working hard .  a lot of people think that it ' s beneath them to do  menial '  work ,  says an auto mechanic named aaron .  their attitude is   i ' m only doing this until a better opportunity comes along .   '   why do many feel that hard work is not for them .  perhaps they have been influenced by the media , which often portrays an  ideal  life as one of luxury and ease .  people think that the harder you have to work to make a living , the less successful you are ,  says matthew , a maintenance worker .  a janitor named shane has noticed the same trend .  he says   a full day ' s work for a full day ' s wage is something that people simply do not do anymore .  on the other hand , many successful people actually enjoy hard work .  i believe that happiness and enjoyment are linked to work ,  he says .  less work and activity is not a venture that will lead to long - term happiness  only long - term boredom .  how have people like daniel and andre developed a positive view of hard work .  simply put , they have applied bible principles in their life .  far from discouraging hard work , the bible promotes diligence and perseverance .  but the bible does more than just tell us to work .  it also shows us how to enjoy our work .  which bible principles can help you to find satisfaction in your work .  we invite you to consider a few of them , as discussed in the following article . 
how to enjoy your work  everyone should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all his hard work .  it is the gift of god .  if god wanted us to enjoy our work , is it not logical that he would show us how to find such joy .  thankfully , he does  through the pages of his word , the bible .  consider the following bible - based advice for finding satisfaction in your work .  whether your work is mostly mental , mostly physical , or somewhere in between , recognize that  there is benefit in every kind of hard work .  what sort of benefit .  for one thing , hard work helps us to care for our material needs .  true , god promises to provide for the needs of those who sincerely worship him .  but he also expects us to do our part by diligently trying to earn an honest living .  thus , we can view our work as a means to an end .  work is an honorable way to care for our responsibilities .  if you are able to pay for what you need , then your work is doing what it is supposed to do .  moreover , hard work contributes to our self - respect .  after all , hard work is just that  hard .  when we discipline ourselves to stick with our work  even if it seems boring or difficult  we can have the satisfaction of knowing that we held ourselves to a high standard .  we have won a victory over the inclination to take the easy way out .  in that sense , work brings an intense feeling of satisfaction .  i love the feeling i have after a long day of work ,  says aaron , quoted in the preceding article .  i may be exhausted  and my work might have even gone unnoticed by others  but i know that i ' ve accomplished something .  the bible speaks highly of the man who is  skillful at his work  and the woman who  delights to work with her hands .  of course , a person does not become skillful automatically .  and few of us enjoy doing things that we are not good at .  perhaps that is why many do not enjoy their work  they simply have not put forth enough effort to become good at it .  in reality , a person can learn to enjoy almost any kind of work if he approaches it with the right mind - set  that is , if he focuses on learning how to do the job well .  you never get that feeling from cutting corners or doing only the minimum .  avoid the trap of thinking only about how much money you are earning .  rather , ask yourself such questions as these   why is this job necessary .  what would happen if it wasn ' t done  or it wasn ' t done right .  how does my work benefit others .   '  that last question is especially good to think about , for work is most satisfying when we see how it benefits other people .  jesus himself said   there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving .  in addition to those who benefit directly from our services  such as customers and employers  there are others who benefit from our hard work .  these include members of our household and those in need .  members of our household .  when a family head works hard to provide for members of his household , he benefits them in at least two ways .  first , he makes sure that they have the physical necessities of life  food , clothing , and shelter .  he thus fulfills his god - given responsibility to  provide for those who are his own .  second , a diligent breadwinner teaches by example the importance of hard work .  my father is a great example of someone who has a good work ethic ,  says shane , quoted in the preceding article .  he is an honest man who has worked hard his whole life , the majority of it as a carpenter .  from his example , i ' ve learned the value of working with your hands , building things that will have practical use for other people .  those in need .  the apostle paul advised christians to  do hard work .  so that  they  may have something to share with someone in need .  indeed , when we work hard to provide for ourselves and our family , we may also be in a position to help those who are less fortunate .  so hard work can enable us to experience the greater happiness of giving .  in his famous sermon on the mount , jesus said   if someone in authority compels you into service for a mile , go with him two miles .  how might you apply the principle behind those words to your own work .  rather than simply doing the minimum , look for ways to do more than is required .  set personal goals  challenge yourself to do your work better or faster than expected .  take pride in even the small details of your work .  when you go the extra mile , you are more likely to enjoy your work .  because you are in control of your actions .  you are giving more because you want to , not because someone forced you to .  true , few of us will be put under literal slavery or forced labor .  however , a person who does only the bare minimum may feel that he is enslaved , always under the yoke of the demands of others .  but the person who goes the extra mile  doing more because he chooses to  feels in control of his life .  he remains master over his actions .  hard work is admirable , yet we do well to remember that there is more to life than work .  true , the bible encourages diligence .  but it does not encourage becoming a workaholic .  a workaholic may never enjoy the fruitage of his labor if his work consumes all his time and energy .  in effect , his work becomes as pointless as  chasing after the wind .  the bible can help us to cultivate a balanced view of work .  although it says we should apply ourselves to our work , it also advises us to  make sure of the more important things .  what are the more important things .  these include spending time with family and friends .  even more important are spiritual activities , such as reading god ' s word and meditating on it .  those who keep their life balanced are likely to enjoy their work even more .  one of my former employers is a great example of someone with a balanced work ethic ,  says william , quoted earlier .  he works hard , and he has a good rapport with his clients because of the quality of his work .  but at the end of the day , when the job is done , he knows how to leave his work behind and focus on his family and his worship .  and you know what .  he ' s one of the happiest people i know .  when i ' m tired at the end of the day , i feel a real sense of accomplishment and joy .  i know i really worked that day .  working hard is the best way to work .  if you ' re going to do something worthwhile , do it right .  the human body can do extraordinary things .  i like to show my appreciation for the gift of life by using it to work hard and help other people .  also that everyone should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all his hard work .  it is the gift of god .  this is what jehovah says , your repurchaser , the holy one of israel   i , jehovah , am your god , the one teaching you to benefit yourself , the one guiding you in the way you should walk .  there is benefit in every kind of hard work , but mere talk leads to want .  so never be anxious and say ,  what are we to eat .   '  or ,  what are we to drink .   '  or ,  what are we to wear .  your heavenly father knows that you need all these things .  in fact , when we were with you , we used to give you this order   if anyone does not want to work , neither let him eat .  a door keeps turning on its hinges , and the lazy one on his bed .  have you seen a man skillful at his work .  he will stand before kings  he will not stand before common men .  she obtains wool and linen  she delights to work with her hands .  i have shown you in all things that by working hard in this way , you must assist those who are weak and must keep in mind the words of the lord jesus , when he himself said   there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving .   '        certainly if anyone does not provide for those who are his own , and especially for those who are members of his household , he has disowned the faith and is worse than a person without faith .  let the one who steals steal no more  rather , let him do hard work , doing good work with his hands , so that he may have something to share with someone in need .  do not withhold good from those to whom you should give it if it is within your power to help .  and if someone in authority compels you into service for a mile , go with him two miles .  but i do not want to do anything without your consent , so that your good deed may be done , not under compulsion , but of your own free will .  the hand of the diligent ones will rule , but idle hands will be put to forced labor .  the lazy person has his cravings , yet he has nothing , but the diligent one will be fully satisfied .  better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind .  that you may make sure of the more important things , so that you may be flawless and not stumbling others up to the day of christ . 
a conversation with a neighbor the following is a typical conversation that one of jehovah ' s witnesses might have with a neighbor .  let us imagine that a witness named brian has contacted a man named eric .  eric  i should tell you that i ' m not very religious .  so i don ' t think we have much to talk about .  brian  i appreciate your telling me that .  by the way , my name is brian .  and your name .  brian  it ' s nice to meet you , eric .  eric  you too .  brian  if i may ask , did you grow up in a religious household .  but when i left home for college , i kind of lost touch with religion .  brian  i see .  what did you study in college .  eric  social studies and history .  i ' ve always liked history  you know , man ' s journey on earth .  brian  history can be fascinating .  the bible , as you may know , is a book of history .  did you ever include the bible in your research .  eric  not really .  i know it ' s a good book , but i never really thought of the bible as a historical book .  brian  you seem to be an open - minded person .  if you have a few minutes , i would like to show you just a few examples of accurate history found in the bible .  but i don ' t have a bible .  brian  that ' s ok .  i can show you from my copy .  eric  how is that an example of accurate history .  brian  well , critics at one time claimed that king david never existed .  eric  really .  why would they question his existence .  brian  there was little evidence outside the bible that he was a real person .  eric  interesting .  brian  another person from the bible whose existence was questioned was pontius pilate , a governor who ruled in jesus '  day .  eric  yes , i see .  it says that  when pontius pilate was governor of judea , herod was district ruler of galilee .  brian  right .  for years , some scholars doubted whether pontius pilate was a real person .  i ' ve never heard those details before .  brian  i ' m glad to share them with you .  eric  to be honest , i have always respected the bible as a work of literature , but i ' ve never really felt that it had any relevance to our time .  it may contain accurate history , but i don ' t think it has any practical value .  brian  a lot of people would agree with that statement .  but i believe differently .  here ' s why  our basic human needs have not changed from the beginning of time .  for example , we have always needed food , clothing , and shelter .  we ' ve always felt the need to communicate with one another and to have a happy family .  isn ' t it true that we all value those things .  brian  the bible can help us in all those areas .  it is what we might call an old but modern book .  eric  what do you mean .  brian  let me put it another way  the bible contains fundamental principles that are as relevant today as they were when they were written centuries ago .  the bible contains fundamental principles that are as relevant today as they were when they were written centuries ago eric  ok .  in what areas .  brian  when it comes to things such as having a balanced view of money or a happy family life or being a good friend , bible principles can guide us .  this book is like a road map to success .  wouldn ' t you agree , for instance , that being a successful husband and family head these days can be a challenge .  eric  well , yes , i have to agree with you there .  my wife and i have been married for about a year , and it ' s not always easy to see eye to eye .  brian  exactly .  but the bible contains simple principles that work .  if you like , you can read those verses .  it says   let wives be in subjection to their husbands as to the lord , because a husband is head of his wife just as the christ is head of the congregation , he being a savior of this body .  a man who loves his wife loves himself .  brian  good .  isn ' t it true that if both mates tried to apply that simple advice , family life would improve .  eric  yes , i guess so .  but that ' s easier said than done .  brian  true  no one is perfect .  in fact , in that same chapter of the bible there is a verse that encourages us to be reasonable .  with any relationship , there needs to be balance and compromise .  my wife and i have found that the bible can help us find that balance .  eric  that makes sense .  brian  jehovah ' s witnesses have a web site that has some good information on marriage and family life .  if you have a couple of minutes , i could show you a sample of what it offers .  i can spare a couple of minutes .  brian  good .  the address for the web site is www .  here is the home page .  eric  i like the photos .  brian  those are scenes of the ministry work that we do all over the world .  ah , here we are .  this section is entitled  help for couples and parents .  under that heading , there are several brief articles dealing with different situations .  is there one that interests you .  solving problems in your marriage .  i think i could use that .  brian  this article outlines four steps to solving problems .  notice this paragraph .  would you like to read it , eric .  it says   if communication is the lifeblood of a marriage , then love and respect are the heart and lungs of the relationship .  hmm , i like the way they explain that .  brian  thank you for reading .  there ' s a bible verse cited here .  you can open it by tapping on it .  eric  yes , i see it .  it says   each one of you must love his wife as he does himself  on the other hand , the wife should have deep respect for her husband .  brian  did you notice that the emphasis is on giving what each one expects to receive .  eric  i ' m not sure what you mean .  brian  well , isn ' t it true that the man wants to feel he is respected by his wife and that in turn , the wife wants to be assured that her husband really loves her .  i ' ll agree with that .  brian  if the husband often looks for ways to show his love for his wife , wouldn ' t it be easier for the wife to manifest respect for him .  eric  that sounds as if it would work .  and to repeat the illustration we read earlier , the  heart and lungs  of the marriage will remain healthy .  eric  i must admit , there is more to the bible than i thought .  brian  i am happy to hear that , eric .  i would like to meet you here again and get your opinion on the subheading  four steps to solving problems  that appears in this same article on our web site .  my wife and i will take a look at it together .  is there a particular bible subject that you have wondered about .  are you curious about any of the beliefs or religious practices of jehovah ' s witnesses .  if so , do not hesitate to ask one of jehovah ' s witnesses .  he or she will be pleased to discuss such matters with you .  published by jehovah ' s witnesses .  in the same way husbands should love their wives as their own bodies .  a man who loves his wife loves himself ,      in the same way husbands should love their wives as their own bodies .  a man who loves his wife loves himself ,      nevertheless , each one of you must love his wife as he does himself  on the other hand , the wife should have deep respect for her husband .  on this account stop being unreasonable , but keep perceiving what the will of jehovah is . 
sadly , i can still remember the ugly marks that were left there by the ravages of the second world war .  in my early childhood , i was raised by my grandparents .  i remember them fondly  especially my grandmother elisabeth .  she instilled in me a strong faith in god .  from the age of three , i repeated with her every evening what is sometimes called the lord ' s prayer .  my grandparents took care of me in my early years because my parents were working day and night , hoping to save enough money to buy a decent home .  every second saturday , though , the entire family gathered for a meal .  i cherished those times we had together .  finally , i was to live with my parents  i was elated .  six months later , however , that happiness came to a sudden end .  my father died of cancer .  i was devastated .  i remember praying   god , i begged you to save my dad .  why didn ' t you answer my prayers .  i desperately wanted to know where my father was .  i wondered   has he gone to heaven .  or has he ceased to exist forever .   '  i envied other children who still had a father .  for many years , i went to the cemetery nearly every day .  i would kneel at my father ' s grave and pray   please , god , i want to know where my dad is .  i also prayed for help to understand the meaning of life .  i thought that among the vast and rich german literature , perhaps i could find answers to my questions .  i eagerly read books by german philosophers , especially those dealing with the meaning of human existence .  although i found some interesting ideas , none of them fully satisfied me .  i continued praying for answers .  at the time , hungary was under communist rule .  shortly after we were married , rose and i escaped to austria .  our goal was to emigrate eventually to sydney , australia , where my uncle lived .  i soon found work in austria .  one day , a workmate told me that i could find answers to all my questions in the bible .  he gave me a couple of books that discussed the bible .  i devoured those books and wanted to learn more .  so i wrote to jehovah ' s witnesses , the publishers of the books , and requested more literature .  on the day of our first wedding anniversary , rose and i were visited by a young austrian witness .  he brought the literature that i had requested and offered me a bible study , which i accepted .  since i was eager to learn , we studied twice a week  each study session lasting for about four hours .  i was thrilled by what the witnesses taught me from the bible .  when they showed me god ' s name , jehovah , in my hungarian bible , i could hardly believe it .  i was impressed by the bible ' s clear , logical answers to my questions .  for example , i learned that the dead are unconscious , as if in a deep sleep .  i also learned about the bible ' s promise of a new world where  death will be no more .  i hope to see my father again , for in that new world ,  there is going to be a resurrection .  rose joined me wholeheartedly in studying the bible .  we made rapid progress , finishing the study publication in just two months .  we attended every meeting that the witnesses held at the kingdom hall .  we were deeply impressed by the love , helpfulness , and unity among jehovah ' s witnesses .  we immediately located jehovah ' s witnesses there .  the local witnesses made us feel at home right away .  i have finally found answers to the questions that troubled me for so long .  by drawing close to jehovah god , i ' ve also found the best father imaginable .  and my hope of seeing my biological father again in the coming new world means a great deal to me .  we have been privileged to teach the bible to hundreds of people .  for the living know that they will die , but the dead know nothing at all , nor do they have any more reward , because all memory of them is forgotten .  whatever your hand finds to do , do with all your might , for there is no work nor planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the grave , where you are going .  after he said these things , he added   laz a rus our friend has fallen asleep , but i am traveling there to awaken him .  but they imagined he was speaking about taking rest in sleep .  but let us go to him .  with that i heard a loud voice from the throne say   look .  the tent of god is with mankind , and he will reside with them , and they will be his people .  and god himself will be with them .  the former things have passed away .  and i have hope toward god , which hope these men also look forward to , that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous .  i am giving you a new commandment , that you love one another  just as i have loved you , you also love one another .  draw close to god , and he will draw close to you .  cleanse your hands , you sinners , and purify your hearts , you indecisive ones . 
imitate their faith   joseph joseph walked along the dark corridor , dripping with sweat from his toil in the stifling heat .  outside , the egyptian sun was baking the prison like a kiln .  it seemed at times as if he knew every brick in the place , every crack in every wall .  this was his whole world now .  true , he was highly regarded here .  nonetheless , he was a prisoner .  how often he must have cast his thoughts back to his life in the high rocky hills in hebron , where he had tended his father ' s flocks .  such freedom seemed almost unimaginable now .  joseph ' s jealous brothers had turned on him with murderous hatred and then sold him as a slave .  he was taken down to egypt , where he first served in the household of the egyptian official potiphar .  joseph held his master ' s trust until a false accusation of rape from potiphar ' s wife landed him here in this prison .  to put it mildly , his life was not turning out as he had hoped .  would he ever be set free .  would he see his dear elderly father again or his beloved younger brother , benjamin .  how long would he be stuck in this pit .  have you ever felt as joseph did .  sometimes life turns out to be a far cry from our youthful hopes .  indeed , painful situations can seem to drag on endlessly , and it can be hard to see a way out or a way to endure .  let us see what we can learn from the faith of joseph .  joseph knew that his god , jehovah , never lost sight of him , and this knowledge surely helped him to endure .  even here in a foreign prison , jehovah found ways to bless joseph .  thus , we read   jehovah continued with joseph and kept showing loyal love to him and granting him favor in the eyes of the chief officer of the prison .  as joseph continued to work hard , he kept giving his god a basis for blessing him .  how comforting it must have been for him to know that jehovah was always with him .  did jehovah intend to let joseph remain in that prison indefinitely .  joseph could only guess at the answer , and he surely kept the matter before his god in prayer .  as it so often happens , the answer came in a most unexpected way .  one day , there was some commotion in the prison as two new inmates arrived  officers from pharaoh ' s personal staff .  one was the king ' s chief baker  the other was the chief cupbearer .  the chief of the guard entrusted joseph with the care of those two formerly prominent men .  one night they each had a vivid and puzzling dream .  when joseph saw them in the morning , he could tell that something was wrong .  so he asked   why are your faces gloomy today .  perhaps his kindly manner assured the men that it was safe for them to reveal their troubles .  joseph did not know it , but that conversation would lead to a turning point in his life .  would there have been any conversation , though , had joseph not chosen to show a little kind concern for others .  his choice may move us to ask ourselves ,  do i express my faith in god by showing an interest in fellow humans .   '  joseph treated his fellow prisoners with kindness and dignity the two men explained that they were agitated by their vivid and puzzling dreams  and by the fact that they had no interpreter with them .  the egyptians placed a lot of weight on dreams and depended heavily on the men who claimed to be able to interpret them .  the two men did not know that their dreams had come from joseph ' s god , jehovah .  but joseph knew .  he assured them   do not interpretations belong to god .  relate it  the dream  to me , please .  joseph ' s words resound today for all sincere students of the bible .  if only every religious person showed the same humility .  we need to be willing to set aside prideful human thinking and to rely on god as we seek correct interpretations of his word .  the cupbearer went first .  he told joseph of a dream about a vine with three twigs that bore clusters of grapes .  the grapes ripened , and the cupbearer squeezed the juice into pharaoh ' s cup .  thanks to jehovah , joseph instantly knew the meaning behind the dream .  he told the cupbearer that the three twigs meant three days  within that time , pharaoh would restore the cupbearer to his former position .  as relief swept over the cupbearer ' s features , joseph added this request   please show me loyal love and mention me to pharaoh .  joseph explained that he had been kidnapped from his home and imprisoned without just cause .  encouraged by the good news the cupbearer had received , the baker asked joseph the meaning of his own dream in which he had seen three baskets of bread as well as birds eating from one of the baskets on his head .  the answer to this riddle was also given to joseph .  but it did not mean good news for the baker .  joseph said   this is its interpretation  the three baskets are three days .  three days from now , pharaoh will behead you and will hang you on a stake , and the birds will eat your flesh from you .  like all of god ' s faithful servants , joseph boldly revealed god ' s messages , both the good news and the news of impending judgment .  three days later , joseph ' s words came true .  pharaoh held a birthday party  a practice not found among god ' s people in bible times  and pronounced judgment on his two servants .  the baker was executed , just as joseph had foretold , whereas the cupbearer was restored to his former position .  sadly , though , that neglectful man forgot all about joseph .  two full years passed .  imagine how frustrating that must have been for joseph .  perhaps his hopes were high after jehovah gave him the understanding of the puzzling dreams of the cupbearer and the baker .  thereafter , as each day dawned , joseph may have awakened with renewed hope that this would be the day of his release  only to find once again that the dull routine of prison life dragged on , unchanged .  those two years might well have been the most challenging of all for joseph to endure .  yet , he never gave up his trust in his god , jehovah .  rather than giving in to despair , he was determined to endure , and he emerged from that trying time all the stronger .  in these difficult times , who of us does not need to work on our endurance .  in order to face life ' s ongoing trials , we need the kind of determination , patience , and inner peace that only god can give us .  as he did with joseph , he can help us to fight despair and hold on to hope .  the cupbearer may have forgotten joseph , but jehovah never did .  one night , he sent pharaoh a pair of unforgettable dreams .  in the first , the king saw seven fine - looking , fat cows emerge from the nile river , followed by seven ugly , thin cows .  the thin ones devoured the fat ones .  later , pharaoh dreamed that he saw a stalk of grain sprouting seven choice ears .  but then another seven ears , wind - parched and sickly , sprouted up and devoured the choice ones .  in the morning , pharaoh awoke deeply agitated over the dreams , so he called on all his wise men and magic - practicing priests to interpret them .  they all failed .  whether that means that they were dumbfounded or that they came up with a variety of conflicting ideas , we do not know .  at any rate , pharaoh was let down  yet he was more desperate than ever to find an answer to this puzzle .  finally , the cupbearer remembered joseph .  his conscience stung him , and he told pharaoh about the remarkable young man in prison who two years earlier had correctly interpreted his dream and that of the baker .  immediately , pharaoh had joseph summoned from prison .  imagine joseph ' s feelings as pharaoh ' s messengers came with the royal summons .  he quickly changed his clothes and shaved  likely removing all the hair from his head , for such was the egyptian custom .  no doubt he prayed fervently that jehovah would bless him in this interview .  soon he found himself in the opulent court of the royal palace , standing before the monarch .  we read   then pharaoh said to joseph   i had a dream , but there is no one to interpret it .  now i have heard it said about you that you can hear a dream and interpret it .   '   joseph ' s response showed , once again , both his humility and his faith in his god   i need not be considered .  god will speak concerning pharaoh ' s welfare .  joseph humbly said to pharaoh   i need not be considered .  jehovah loves humble , faithful people , so it is no wonder that he gave joseph the answer that had eluded the wise men and priests .  joseph explained that pharaoh ' s two dreams had the same meaning .  by repeating the message , jehovah was signifying that the matter was  firmly established   absolutely sure of fulfillment .  the fat cows and the healthy ears of grain represented seven years of plenty in egypt , while the lean cows and the sickly ears of grain pictured seven years of famine that would follow the years of plenty .  that famine would devour the land ' s abundance .  pharaoh knew that joseph had the answer .  but what could be done .  joseph recommended a plan of action .  pharaoh needed to find a man both  discreet and wise  to oversee the gathering of the land ' s surplus grain into storehouses during the seven years of plenty and then to distribute that surplus to the needy during the ensuing famine .  joseph ' s experience and abilities more than qualified him for that job , but he did not promote himself .  his humility made such a presumptuous course unthinkable  his faith made it unnecessary .  if we have real faith in jehovah , we have no need for ambition or self - promotion .  we can be at peace , leaving matters in his capable hands .  pharaoh and all his servants saw the wisdom in joseph ' s plan .  the king also acknowledged that joseph ' s god was the real force behind joseph ' s wise words .  he said to his servants there in the royal court   can another man be found like this one in whom there is the spirit of god .  to joseph , he said   since god has caused you to know all of this , there is no one as discreet and wise as you .  you will personally be over my house , and all my people will obey you implicitly .  only in my role as king will i be greater than you .  pharaoh was as good as his word .  joseph was soon clothed in fine linen .  pharaoh gave him a gold necklace , a signet ring , a royal chariot , and full authority to travel through the land and put his plan into effect .  within the space of a day , then , joseph went from prison to palace .  he awoke a lowly convict , and he fell asleep as the ruler second to pharaoh .  how clear that joseph ' s faith in jehovah god was justified .  jehovah saw all the injustices that his servant had suffered through the years .  he addressed those issues at just the right time and in just the right way .  jehovah had in mind not only correcting the wrongs done to joseph but also preserving the future nation of israel .  we will see how that was so in a future article in this series .  if you face a trialsome situation , perhaps an injustice that seems to drag on for years on end , do not despair .  remember joseph .  because he never lost his kindness , his humility , his endurance , and his faith , he gave jehovah every reason to reward him in the end .  so the chief of pharaoh ' s baking staff was a prominent man .  and the chief cupbearer led a staff of servants who made sure that pharaoh ' s wine and perhaps beer were of high quality and were kept safe from any attempt to poison the monarch  a real risk , for court intrigue and assassinations were common .  it was not unusual for the cupbearer to become a trusted adviser to the king .  but jehovah continued with joseph and kept showing loyal love to him and granting him favor in the eyes of the chief officer of the prison .  after these things , the chief cupbearer of the king of egypt and the chief baker sinned against their lord , the king of egypt .  and he committed them to the jail of the house of the chief of the guard , to the place where joseph was a prisoner .  at this they said to him   we each had a dream , but there is no interpreter with us .  joseph said to them   do not interpretations belong to god .  relate it to me , please .  indeed , that is why we also thank god unceasingly , because when you received god ' s word , which you heard from us , you accepted it not as the word of men but , just as it truthfully is , as the word of god , which is also at work in you believers .  however , the undeserved kindness that he gives is greater .  so it says   god opposes the haughty ones , but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones .  so the chief cupbearer related his dream to joseph , saying to him   in my dream , there was a vine before me .  after that i put the cup in phar aoh ' s hand .  please show me loyal love and mention me to phar aoh , in order to get me out of this place .  to proclaim the year of jehovah ' s goodwill and the day of vengeance of our god , to comfort all who mourn ,      now the third day was phar aoh ' s birthday , and he made a feast for all his servants , and he brought out both the chief cupbearer and the chief baker in the presence of his servants .  at the end of two full years , phar aoh dreamed that he was standing by the nile river .  but let endurance complete its work , so that you may be complete and sound in all respects , not lacking in anything .  rejoice in the hope .  endure under tribulation .  persevere in prayer .  may the god who gives hope fill you with all joy and peace by your trusting in him , so that you may abound in hope with power of holy spirit .  at the end of two full years , phar aoh dreamed that he was standing by the nile river .  at this phar aoh woke up .  there were seven ears of grain coming up on one stalk , full and choice .  at this phar aoh woke up and realized that it was a dream .  so he sent for all the magic - practicing priests of egypt and all her wise men .  phar aoh related his dreams to them , but there was no one who could interpret them for phar aoh .  at that the chief cupbearer spoke with phar aoh , saying   i am confessing my sins today .  so he committed me to the jail of the house of the chief of the guard , both me and the chief baker .  he and i each had a dream with its own interpretation .  when we related them to him , he interpreted for us the meaning of each dream .  i was restored to my office , but the other man was hanged .  so phar aoh sent for joseph , and they brought him quickly from the prison .  he shaved and changed his clothes and went in to phar aoh .  now i have heard it said about you that you can hear a dream and interpret it .  god will speak concerning phar aoh ' s welfare .  then joseph said to phar aoh   the dreams of phar aoh are one and the same .  the true god has told to phar aoh what he will do .  likewise , the seven good ears of grain are seven years .  the dreams are one and the same .  so now let phar aoh look for a man who is discreet and wise and place him over the land of egypt .  so phar aoh said to his servants   can another man be found like this one in whom there is the spirit of god .  only in my role as king will i be greater than you .  then phar aoh removed his signet ring from his own hand and put it on joseph ' s hand and clothed him with garments of fine linen and placed a necklace of gold around his neck .  thus he put him over all the land of egypt . 
bible questions answered
 how could a world government unite people of all nations .  today many people suffer because they are so poor , while others are very rich .  but a compassionate world government could make sure that all have what they need .  do you think humans will ever create such a government .  throughout history , governments have failed in many ways to care for their subjects , especially the poor .  some governments are cruel .  but almighty god has promised to provide a government that will replace all others .  its ruler will really take care of people .  jehovah god has chosen an ideal world ruler  his son , jesus .  as a man on earth , jesus was interested in helping people .  as king , he will unite people of all nations and relieve people of all suffering .  will everyone accept jesus as ruler .  but jehovah is patient .  he is giving people the opportunity to accept jesus as ruler .  soon , jesus will rid the earth of bad people and will establish peace and security worldwide .   , published by jehovah ' s witnesses also available at www .  org     look .  a king will reign for righteousness , and princes will rule for justice .  the result of true righteousness will be peace , and the fruitage of true righteousness will be lasting tranquillity and security .  and all your sons will be taught by jehovah , and the peace of your sons will be abundant .  it does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step .  i saw the tears of the oppressed , and there was no one to comfort them .  and their oppressors had the power , and there was no one to comfort them .  he will strike the earth with the rod of his mouth and put the wicked to death with the breath of his lips .  and this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people .  it will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms , and it alone will stand forever ,    par .  you will become pregnant and give birth to a son , and you are to name him jesus .  they will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears .  nation will not lift up sword against nation , nor will they learn war anymore . 
now i am speaking about christ and the congregation .  she says   they are at the shopping mall buying some new clothes .  he says   annoyed and with a raised voice   what do you mean  buying new clothes '  .  they bought new outfits just last month .  she says   defensively , feeling hurt and accused   but there was a sale .  anyhow , they asked me first , and i said they could go .  he says   losing his temper and shouting   you know i hate it when our girls spend money without consulting me .  how could you make such a rash decision without talking to me .  what problems do you think the couple quoted above need to resolve .  the husband obviously has trouble controlling his anger .  besides that , though , the couple appear to disagree about how much freedom their children should have .  and there seems to be a breakdown in communication .  no marriage is perfect .  all couples will encounter problems of some kind .  whether the issues are large or small , it is imperative that a husband and wife learn to resolve them .  over time , unresolved problems may become barricades that block communication .  there are contentions that are like the bar of a dwelling tower ,  observed wise king solomon .  how can you open the door to more effective communication when dealing with problems .  if communication is the lifeblood of a marriage , then love and respect are the heart and lungs of the relationship .  when it comes to solving problems , love will motivate a couple to overlook past failures  and the resulting emotional injuries  and focus on the issue at hand .  couples who show respect allow each other to talk freely and endeavor to hear what is meant , not just what is said .  four steps to solving problems consider the four steps listed below , and note how bible principles can help you to solve problems in a loving and respectful manner .  set a time to discuss the issue .  for everything there is an appointed time , .  a time to keep quiet and a time to speak .  as demonstrated in the altercation quoted earlier , some problems may evoke strong emotions .  if that happens , have the self - control to call a temporary halt  to  keep quiet   before tempers flare .  you can save your relationship from much damage if you heed the bible ' s advice   starting a quarrel is like a leak in a dam , so stop it before a fight breaks out .  however , there is also  a time to speak .  problems , like weeds , flourish when neglected .  so do not ignore the issue , hoping it will just go away .  if you call a halt to a discussion , show respect for your mate by picking a time in the near future when you will talk about the problem .  such a promise can help both of you apply the spirit of the bible ' s counsel   let the sun not set with you in a provoked state .  of course , you then need to follow through on your promise .  try this  pick a regular time each week when you can discuss family problems .  if you notice that you are more prone to argue at a certain time of day  for example , when you first arrive home from work or before you have eaten  agree not to discuss problems at those times .  rather , choose a time when you are both likely to be less stressed .  express your opinion honestly and respectfully .  speak truth each one of you with his neighbor .  if you are married , your closest neighbor is your spouse .  so be honest and specific about your feelings when talking to your mate .  i learned that such an expectation was unrealistic .  now i try to express my thoughts and feelings clearly .  remember , your goal when discussing a problem is , not to win a battle or conquer an enemy , but simply to let your mate know your thoughts .  to do so effectively , state what you think the problem is , then say when it arises , and then explain how it makes you feel .  for example , if you are annoyed by your mate ' s untidiness , you can respectfully say ,  when you come home from work and leave your clothes on the floor  the when and what of the problem  , i feel that my efforts to care for the home are not appreciated  explains exactly how you feel .   '  then tactfully suggest what you think would be a solution to the problem .  try this  to help you have your thoughts clearly in mind before talking to your mate , write down what you understand the problem to be and how you would like to resolve it .  listen to and acknowledge your mate ' s feelings .  the disciple james wrote that christians should be  swift about hearing , slow about speaking , slow about wrath .  few things cause more unhappiness in a marriage than the impression that your partner does not understand how you feel about a problem .  so be determined not to give your mate such an impression .  how can you overcome this barrier .  do not presume that you know what your partner is thinking or feeling .  by presumptuousness one only causes a struggle , but with those consulting together there is wisdom ,  states god ' s word .  allow your spouse the dignity of expressing his or her opinion without interruption .  then , to ensure that you understood what was said , rephrase what you heard and repeat it to your mate , doing so without sarcasm or aggression .  permit your mate to correct you if you misunderstood something that was said .  do not do all the talking .  take turns in this style of conversation until you both agree that you understand each other ' s thoughts and feelings on the matter .  true , it requires humility and patience to listen attentively to your spouse and to acknowledge his or her opinion .  but if you take the lead in showing your mate such honor , your mate will be more inclined to honor you .  try this  when repeating your mate ' s comments , do not just parrot his or her exact words .  in an empathetic manner , try to describe what you understand your mate is both saying and feeling .  agree on a solution .  two are better than one , because they have a good reward for their hard work .  for if one of them should fall , the other one can raise his partner up .  few problems in a marriage can be solved unless both partners work together and support each other .  true , jehovah appointed the husband as head of the family .  but headship does not mean dictatorship .  a wise husband will not make arbitrary decisions .  tanya , now married for seven years , says   it isn ' t about who is right and who is wrong .  sometimes there are just different opinions on how to solve a problem .  i have found that the key to success is to be flexible and reasonable .  try this  create a spirit of teamwork by having both of you write down as many different possible solutions to the problem as you can think of .  when you have run out of ideas , review your list and implement the solution that you both agree on .  then pick a time in the near future when you will check whether the decision has been acted on and how successful it has been .  pull together , not apart jesus likened marriage to a yoke .  in his day , a yoke was a beam of wood that tied two animals together so that they could perform work .  if the animals did not cooperate , they would accomplish little good and the yoke would chafe their necks .  if they worked together , they could pull heavy loads or plow a field .  likewise , a husband and wife who fail to work as a team may chafe under the yoke of marriage .  on the other hand , if they learn to pull together , they can solve almost any problem and accomplish much good .  can you do the same .  ask yourself .  what problem do i most want to discuss with my spouse .  how can i make sure that i understand my mate ' s true feelings on this subject .  if i always insist on doing things my way , what problems might i create .  footnote  some names have been changed .  how can a woman succeed as a wife .  what is involved in being a fine parent .  how can children help to make family life happy .  jehovah god wants your family life to be happy .  his word , the bible , provides guidelines for each family member , describing the role that god wants each one to play .  when family members fulfill their roles in harmony with god ' s counsel , the results are very satisfying .  jesus said   happy are those hearing the word of god and keeping it .  every family on earth exists because of our heavenly father  and he certainly knows what makes families happy .  so , what does the bible teach about the role of each family member .  he put them in a beautiful earthly paradise home  the garden of eden  and told them to have children .  be fruitful and become many , fill the earth and subdue it ,  said jehovah .  this is not just a story or a myth , for jesus showed that what genesis says about the start of family life is true .  although we face many problems and life now is not as god purposed it to be , let us see why happiness within the family is possible .  how , though , can we imitate god , since we cannot even see him .  we can learn how jehovah acts because he sent his firstborn son from heaven to the earth .  when on earth , this son , jesus christ , imitated his heavenly father so well that seeing and listening to jesus was just like being with jehovah and hearing him .  therefore , by learning about the love that jesus showed and following his example , each one of us can help to make family life happier .  consider this bible direction   husbands , continue loving your wives , just as the christ also loved the congregation and gave himself up for it .  in the same way husbands should love their wives as their own bodies .  a man who loves his wife loves himself , for no man ever hated his own body , but he feeds and cherishes it , just as the christ does the congregation .  jesus  loved them to the end ,  sacrificing his life for them , even though they were far from perfect .  similarly , husbands are urged   keep on loving your wives and do not be bitterly angry with them .  what will help a husband to apply such counsel , especially if his wife at times fails to act with discretion .  he should remember his own mistakes and what he must do to receive god ' s forgiveness .  what is that .  he must forgive those who sin against him , and that includes his wife .  of course , she should do the same .  do you see why some have said that a successful marriage is the union of two good forgivers .  he took into account their limitations and physical needs .  when they were tired , for example , he said   come , you yourselves , privately into an isolated place and rest up a little .  wives too deserve thoughtful consideration .  the bible describes them as  a weaker vessel  to whom husbands are commanded to assign  honor .  because both husbands and wives share equally in  the undeserved favor of life .  husbands should remember that it is faithfulness , not whether a person is male or female , that makes one precious to god .  this is because a man and his wife  are no longer two , but one flesh ,  as jesus pointed out .  so they must limit their sexual interests to each other .  they can do this if they show unselfish concern for each other ' s needs .  noteworthy is the reminder   no man ever hated his own body , but he feeds and cherishes it .  husbands need to love their wives as they do themselves , remembering that they are accountable to their own head , jesus christ .   '    jesus '  tenderness was a refreshing quality , one that was appealing to women who became his disciples .  and wives yearn for tender affection from their husbands .  even jesus has one he submits to as his head .  the head of the christ is god ,  just as  the head of a woman is the man .  jesus '  submission to god ' s headship is a fine example , since all of us have a head to whom we must submit .  so , what should a wife do .  she should not belittle what her husband does or try to take over his headship .  a wife does well to remember that in god ' s view , a quiet and mild spirit is of great value .  by displaying such a spirit , she will find it easier to demonstrate godly subjection , even under trying circumstances .  furthermore , the bible says   the wife should have deep respect for her husband .  but what if he does not accept christ as his head .  the bible urges wives   be in subjection to your husbands , so that if any are not obedient to the word , they may be won without a word through the conduct of their wives , because of having been eyewitnesses of your chaste conduct together with deep respect .  her viewpoint may be correct , and the whole family could benefit if he listened to her .  although abraham did not agree when his wife , sarah , recommended a practical solution to a certain household problem , god told him   listen to her .  of course , when a husband makes a final decision that does not conflict with god ' s law , his wife shows her subjection by supporting it .  for example , the bible shows that married women are  to love their husbands , to love their children , to be sound in mind , chaste , working at home , good , subjecting themselves to their own husbands .  a wife and mother who acts in this way will gain the lasting love and respect of her family .  since marriage is a union of imperfect individuals , however , some extreme circumstances may result in separation or divorce .  the bible allows for separation under certain circumstances .  yet , separation must not be taken lightly , for the bible counsels   a wife should not separate from her husband .   , and a husband should not leave his wife .  and only sexual immorality by one of the marriage mates provides scriptural grounds for divorce .  when others tried to prevent the little ones from approaching jesus , he said   let the young children come to me  do not try to stop them .  the bible says that he then  took the children into his arms and began blessing them , laying his hands on them .  since jesus took time for little ones , should you not do the same for your own sons and daughters .  they need , not small bits of your time , but large amounts of it .  you need to take time to teach them , for that is what jehovah instructs parents to do .  consider how jesus protected his disciples , whom he affectionately called  little children .  when he was arrested and would soon be killed , jesus made a way for them to escape .  as a parent , you need to be alert to the devil ' s attempts to harm your little ones .  you need to give them advance warning .  never before has the threat to their physical , spiritual , and moral safety been greater .  rather than become angry with them , jesus lovingly continued to appeal to them by word and example .  if you are a parent , can you see how you might follow jesus '  example in the way you correct your children .  true , they need discipline , but it should be given to  the proper degree ,  never in anger .  you would not use thoughtless speech , which is  like the stabs of a sword .  discipline should be delivered in such a way that your child will later see how appropriate it was .  yes , they can .  by his own example , jesus showed how children should obey their parents .  just as the father taught me ,  he said ,  i speak .  he added   i always do the things pleasing to him .  jesus was obedient to his heavenly father , and the bible tells children to obey their parents .  although jesus was a perfect child , he obeyed his human parents , joseph and mary , who were imperfect .  that surely contributed to the happiness of every member of jesus '  family .  true , young ones may sometimes find it hard to obey their parents , but that is what god wants children to do .  jesus always obeyed his heavenly father , even under difficult circumstances .  once , when it was god ' s will that jesus do something especially hard , jesus said   remove this cup  a certain requirement  from me .  nevertheless , jesus did what god asked , because he realized that his father knew best .  by learning to be obedient , children will make their parents and their heavenly father very happy .  satan the devil uses peer pressure , which can be hard to resist .  how vital it is , then , that children not keep company with wrongdoers .  jacob ' s daughter dinah kept company with those who did not worship jehovah , and this led to a lot of trouble .  think of how the family could be hurt if one of its members were to become involved in sexual immorality .  in fact , applying such counsel is the key to family happiness .  so husbands , love your wife , and treat her as jesus treats his congregation .  parents , train your children .  fathers ,  preside over your household in a fine manner .   '    and children , obey your parents .  none in the family are perfect , for all make mistakes .  so be humble , asking one another for forgiveness .  moreover , it teaches us about god ' s new world and an earthly paradise filled with happy people who worship jehovah .  what wonderful prospects lie ahead .  even now , we can enjoy happy family life by applying god ' s instructions found in his word , the bible .  only if a parent asked a child to break god ' s law would it be right for the child to disobey .  what the bible teaches   husbands need to love their wives as their own bodies .  wives should love their family and respect their husbands .  parents need to love , teach , and protect their children .  children need to obey their parents .  what is the key to a happy family life .  family happiness depends on our recognizing what .  how does the bible describe the start of the human family , and why do we know that what it says is true .  how can each member of the family contribute to its happiness .  why is studying the life of jesus so important to family happiness .  how does the way jesus treats the congregation set an example for husbands .  what must be done to get forgiveness of sins .  what did jesus take into account , setting what example for husbands .  how is it that a husband  who loves his wife loves himself .  being  one flesh  means what for a husband and his wife .  how does jesus provide an example for wives .  what attitude is a wife to have toward her husband , and what may be the effect of her conduct .  why is it not wrong for a wife to express her opinions respectfully .  what does the bible say about separation and divorce .  how did jesus treat children , and what do children need from parents .  what can parents do to protect their children .  what can parents learn from the way that jesus handled his disciples '  imperfections .  in what ways did jesus set a perfect example for children .  why did jesus always obey his heavenly father , and who is happy when children obey their parents today .  how does satan tempt children .  what effect can the bad behavior of children have on parents .  to enjoy happy family life , what must each family member do .  what wonderful prospects lie ahead , and how can we enjoy happy family life now . 
