when a loved one dies
is it wrong to grieve .  dealing with your grief
comforting those who mourn
the dead will live again .  did you know .  i learned to respect women and myself
i am willing to go 
what does the bible say . 
it comforts people with the good news that god ' s heavenly kingdom will soon end all wickedness and transform the earth into a paradise .  it promotes faith in jesus christ , who died so that we might gain everlasting life and who is now ruling as king of god ' s kingdom .  it adheres to the bible as its authority .  this publication is not for sale .  it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit www .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures . 
what do you think .  will these words ever be fulfilled .  will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more .  this issue of the watchtower discusses how god will fulfill that promise and what it can mean for you .  with that i heard a loud voice from the throne say   look .  the tent of god is with mankind , and he will reside with them , and they will be his people .  and god himself will be with them .  the former things have passed away . 
god knows best , baby .  those words were whispered into the ear of a woman named bebe .  she was at the funeral of her father , who had died in a car accident .  bebe had been very close to her father .  the remark came from a well - meaning family friend , but bebe found it more cutting than comforting .  his death wasn ' t for the best ,  she kept repeating to herself .  it was clear that when bebe recounted the incident in a book years later , she was still grieving .  as bebe came to see , it can take a long time for someone to overcome grief , especially when the bereaved person was very close to the deceased .  in the bible , death is aptly described as  the last enemy .  it breaks into our lives with irresistible force , often when we are completely unprepared , and it robs us of those we hold dear .  none of us are immune to its ravages .  so it is not surprising if we feel at a loss when it comes to coping with death and its aftermath .  perhaps you have wondered   how long does it take to get over grief .  how can a person cope with grief .  how can i comfort others who have been bereaved .  is there any hope for our loved ones who have died .   '      and the last enemy , death , is to be brought to nothing . 
when a loved one dies have you ever had a brief bout with illness .  perhaps you recovered so quickly that you have practically forgotten the episode .  well , grief is not like that .  there is no such thing as  getting over '  grief ,  writes dr .  alan wolfelt in his book healing a spouse ' s grieving heart .  however , he adds   over time and with the support of others , your grief will soften .  as an example , consider how the patriarch abraham reacted when his wife died .  the bible says that  abraham began to mourn and to weep over sarah .  the expression  began to  suggests that it took some time for him to cope with his loss .  another example is jacob , who was deceived into believing that his son joseph had been killed by a wild animal .  he grieved for  many days ,  and his family members were unable to comfort him .  several years later , the death of joseph still weighed heavily on his mind .  abraham mourned the loss of his beloved sarah the same is true today of many who mourn the death of someone very close .  consider the following two examples .  the morning of the fatal accident was no different from any other day .  after breakfast , as we always did when he was leaving for work , we gave each other a kiss , a cuddle , and an  i love you .   '  six years later the pain in my heart is still there .  i don ' t think i will ever get over my loss of rob .  whenever i see something in nature that is attractive , my thoughts go to her , and i cannot help wondering how she would have enjoyed seeing what i am seeing .  clearly , such painful and long - lasting feelings are only natural .  each person grieves in his or her own way , and it would be unwise to judge the way another person responds to tragedy .  at the same time , we may need to hold off from condemning ourselves if our reaction to loss seems excessive .  how can we cope with grief .  as we note in the  imitate their faith  article in this issue , isaac was still grieving over the loss of his mother , sarah , three years after her death .  so sarah died in kir i ath - ar ba , that is , heb ron , in the land of ca naan , and abraham began to mourn and to weep over sarah .  with that jacob ripped his garments apart and put sackcloth around his waist and mourned his son for many days .  and his father continued weeping for him .  or  sheol ,  that is , the common grave of mankind .  see glossary .  jacob their father exclaimed to them   it is i you have bereaved .  joseph is no more , and sim e on is no more , and you are going to take benjamin .  it is upon me that all these things have come .  israel exclaimed   it is enough .  my son joseph is still alive .  i must go and see him before i die .  after that isaac brought her into the tent of sarah his mother .  thus he took re bek ah as his wife  and he fell in love with her , and isaac found comfort after the loss of his mother . 
when a loved one dies there is no shortage of advice on this subject .  not all of it , however , is helpful .  for instance , you may find that some will advise you not to cry or show your feelings in any way .  others may push you to do the opposite and expose all your feelings .  the bible presents a more balanced view , one that is supported by modern research .  in some cultures it is considered unmanly for a male to cry .  but is there a real need to feel ashamed about shedding tears , even in public .  mental - health experts acknowledge that tearfulness is a normal part of grieving .  and grieving may , in time , help you to move on despite the enormity of your loss .  suppressing grief , however , may do more harm than good .  the bible lends no support to the notion that it is wrong or unmanly to shed tears of grief .  think of jesus , for example .  at the death of his dear friend lazarus , jesus openly wept , even though he had the power to bring the dead back to life .  bouts of anger are often part of grieving , especially in cases of sudden , unexpected death .  there are many reasons why a bereaved person may feel angry , such as when thoughtless and unfounded comments are made by a respected person .  at the funeral , the anglican minister said that god needs good people and takes them early .  this angered me because we desperately needed our father .  and what about guilt .  especially in the case of unexpected death , the bereaved person may repeatedly think ,  it might not have happened if only i had done this or that .   '  or maybe your last encounter with the deceased involved an argument .  this may add to your feeling of guilt .  if you are being plagued by such feelings of guilt and anger , it is important not to bottle up these emotions .  rather , speak to a friend who will listen and reassure you that such irrational feelings are common to many bereaved ones .  the bible reminds us   a true friend shows love at all times , and is a brother who is born for times of distress .  the best friend a bereaved person can have is our creator , jehovah god .  pour out your heart to him in prayer because  he cares for you .  moreover , he promises that all who do so will have their thoughts and feelings soothed by  the peace of god that surpasses all understanding .  also , allow god to help you heal by means of his consoling word , the bible .  make a list of comforting scriptures .  you may even want to memorize a few of them .  having such thoughts to ponder over may be especially helpful at night when you are alone and find it hard to sleep .  jack says that at times he feels intense loneliness .  but he has found help in prayer .  when i pray to jehovah ,  he explains ,  i never feel alone .  i often wake up during the night and cannot get back to sleep .  after reading and meditating on comforting thoughts from the scriptures and then pouring out the feelings of my heart in prayer , i sense a calmness and a transcending peace come over me , putting my mind and heart at rest and enabling me to sleep .  a young woman named vanessa lost her mother to illness .  she too has experienced the power of prayer .  in my most difficult times ,  she says ,  i would just call on god ' s name and break down in tears .  jehovah listened to my prayers and always gave me the strength i needed .  some bereavement counselors advise those who are struggling with grief to get involved in helping others or to volunteer their time in some community service .  doing so can bring joy and may ease a person ' s grief .  many bereaved christians have found that working to help others has brought them great comfort .  the bible reveals three causes of death .  god feels for you in your pain .  god patiently listens to the prayers of his servants .  god misses people who have died .  god promises to resurrect the dead .  when jesus saw her weeping and the jews who had come with her weeping , he groaned within himself  and became troubled .  they said to him   lord , come and see .   ,  in the spirit .  a true friend shows love at all times , and is a brother who is born for times of distress .  while you throw all your anxiety  on him , because he cares for you .  or  cares  worries .  or  your minds  your thoughts .  for this is what the high and lofty one says , who lives  forever and whose name is holy   i reside in the high and holy place , but also with those crushed and lowly in spirit , to revive the spirit of the lowly and to revive the heart of those being crushed .  or  resides .  i have shown you in all things that by working hard in this way , you must assist those who are weak and must keep in mind the words of the lord jesus , when he himself said   there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving .  or  encourages .  or  tribulation .  or  tribulation .  i have seen something further under the sun , that the swift do not always win the race , nor do the mighty win the battle , nor do the wise always have the food , nor do the intelligent always have the riches , nor do those with knowledge always have success , because time and unexpected events  overtake them all .  or  unforeseen occurrence .  you are from your father the devil , and you wish to do the desires of your father .  that one was a murderer when he began ,  and he did not stand fast in the truth , because truth is not in him .  when he speaks the lie , he speaks according to his own disposition , because he is a liar and the father of the lie .  or  from the beginning .  that is why , just as through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin , and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned .  throw your burden on jehovah , and he will sustain you .  never will he allow the righteous one to fall .  or  stagger  totter .  while you throw all your anxiety  on him , because he cares for you .  or  cares  worries .  for you , o jehovah , are good and ready to forgive  you abound in loyal love for all those who call on you .  pray constantly .  o that in the grave  you would conceal me , that you would hide me until your anger passes by , that you would set a time limit for me and remember me .  i will wait all the days of my compulsory service until my relief comes .  you will long  for the work of your hands .  or  sheol ,  that is , the common grave of mankind .  see glossary .  your dead will live .  my corpses  will rise up .  awake and shout joyfully , you residents in the dust .  for your dew is as the dew of the morning ,  and the earth will let those powerless in death come to life .   ,  a corpse of mine .  or possibly ,  the dew of herbs .  or  will give birth to those powerless in death . 
when a loved one dies have you ever felt helpless when someone near to you was grieving over the loss of a loved one .  sometimes we may feel unsure of what to say or do so we wind up saying and doing nothing .  but there are practical , helpful things that we can do .  often , all that is needed is your presence along with a simple expression , such as  i am so sorry .  in many cultures , giving the person a hug or a gentle squeeze of the arm is an effective way to show you care .  if the bereaved one wants to talk , listen sympathetically .  best of all , do something for the bereaved family , perhaps performing a chore the grieving one has not been able to care for , such as cooking a meal , caring for the children , or helping with funeral arrangements if that is desired .  such actions may speak louder than the most eloquent words .  in time , you may be moved to talk about the deceased , perhaps focusing on some good qualities or happy experiences .  such conversation may even bring a smile to the bereaved person ' s face .  for example , pam who lost her husband , ian , six years ago says   people sometimes tell me good things that ian did that i never knew about , and that makes my heart feel good .  researchers report that many bereaved people receive a lot of initial help but that their needs are soon forgotten as friends get busy again with their own lives .  therefore , make a point of contacting a bereaved friend on a regular basis after the loss .  many grieving ones deeply appreciate this opportunity to relieve themselves of prolonged feelings of grief .  thankfully , she received ongoing support from loyal friends .  one named ritsuko is much older than kaori and offered to be her close friend .  to be honest ,  says kaori ,  i wasn ' t happy about that .  i didn ' t want anyone to take the place of my mother , and i didn ' t think that anyone could .  however , because of the way mama ritsuko treated me , i came to feel close to her .  every week , we went out in the evangelizing work together and went to christian meetings together .  she invited me to have tea with her , brought me meals , and wrote me letters and cards many times .  mama ritsuko ' s positive attitude had a good influence on me .  twelve years have passed since kaori ' s mother died , and today she and her husband are full - time evangelizers .  mama ritsuko ,  kaori says ,  continues to show her concern .  when i go back home , i always visit her and enjoy her upbuilding association .  another example of someone who benefited from ongoing support is poli , one of jehovah ' s witnesses in cyprus .  poli had a kind husband , sozos , who set a good example as a christian shepherd by often inviting orphans and widows to their home for association and a meal .  there , they began associating with a congregation of jehovah ' s witnesses .  the friends in my new congregation ,  recalls poli ,  did not know anything about our past and our difficult circumstances .  but that did not stop them from approaching us and embracing us with their kind words and practical help .  how precious that help was , especially at that time , when my son needed his father most .  those taking the lead in the congregation showed a great deal of personal interest in daniel .  one in particular made sure to include daniel when enjoying association with friends or when going out to play ball .  both mother and son are doing well today .  to be sure , there are many ways we can offer practical help and comfort to those who mourn .  the bible also comforts us by means of a thrilling hope for the future .  the form of worship  that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our god and father is this  to look after orphans and widows in their tribulation , and to keep oneself without spot from the world .  or  religion . 
when a loved one dies you may recall that gail , mentioned earlier in this series , doubts whether she will ever get over the death of her husband , rob .  however , she is looking forward to seeing him again in god ' s promised new world .  it reads   god himself will be with them .  and he will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  the former things have passed away .  gail says   this promise says it all .  my feelings really go out to people who have lost someone they love but who are not aware of this hope of seeing their loved one again .  gail acts in harmony with her beliefs by doing volunteer work as a full - time evangelizer , sharing with her neighbors god ' s promise of a future when  death will be no more .  job was confident that he would live again  unbelievable .   '  you may say .  but consider the example of a man named job .  he had been desperately ill .  though job wished he were dead , he still had faith in god ' s power to resurrect him back to life on earth .  he confidently said   o that in the grave you would conceal me .  you will call , and i will answer you .  you will long for the work of your hands .  job was confident that his god would miss him and would long to restore him to life .  soon , god will do just that for job and countless others when this earth is transformed into a paradise .  do not be amazed at this ,  jesus assures us ,  for the hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice and come out .  job will see that promise fulfilled .  he will have the prospect of regaining  his youthful vigor ,  and his flesh will forever remain  fresher than in youth .  the same will happen to all who respond with appreciation to god ' s merciful provision of a resurrection to life on earth .  if you have suffered the loss of someone dear to you , the information we have discussed may not completely take away your grief .  but by meditating on god ' s promises found in the bible , you can find real hope and the strength to keep going .  would you like to learn more about how to cope with grief .  or do you have related questions , such as  why does god allow evil and suffering .  please visit our website , jw .  org , to see how the bible gives comforting , practical answers .  with that i heard a loud voice from the throne say   look .  the tent of god is with mankind , and he will reside with them , and they will be his people .  and god himself will be with them .  the former things have passed away .  so satan went out from the presence  of jehovah and struck job with painful boils  from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head .  or  with severe ulcers .  o that in the grave  you would conceal me , that you would hide me until your anger passes by , that you would set a time limit for me and remember me .  or  sheol ,  that is , the common grave of mankind .  see glossary .  you will call , and i will answer you .  you will long  for the work of your hands .  then he said   jesus , remember me when you get into your kingdom .  and i have hope toward god , which hope these men also look forward to , that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous .  then god shows him favor and says ,  spare him from going down into the pit .  i have found a ransom .   '   or  grave .  or  healthier .  moreover , brothers , we do not want you to be ignorant  about those who are sleeping in death , so that you may not sorrow as the rest do who have no hope .  or  uninformed . 
did you know .  joseph , the carpenter of nazareth , was the adoptive father of jesus .  but who was joseph ' s father .  jesus '  genealogy in matthew ' s gospel names a certain jacob , whereas luke ' s says that joseph was  son of heli .  why the seeming discrepancy .  matthew ' s account reads   jacob became father to joseph ,  employing a greek term indicating clearly that jacob was joseph ' s natural father .  so matthew was tracing joseph ' s natural genealogy , the kingly line of david , through which the legal right to the throne passed to joseph ' s adoptive son , jesus .  on the other hand , luke ' s account says   joseph , son of heli .  that expression ,  son of ,  can be understood as  son - in - law of .  shealtiel was likely married to an unnamed daughter of neri , thus becoming his son - in - law .  joseph was in the same sense  son  of heli , as he married heli ' s daughter mary .  so luke traces jesus '  natural lineage  according to the flesh ,  through his biological mother , mary .  the bible thus gives us two distinct and useful genealogies for jesus .  sheep ' s wool was widely used for fabrics in the ancient middle east as was hair from goats and camels .  the most common textiles were woolen , and the bible frequently refers to sheep , shearing , and woolen clothing .  flax , used to produce linen , was grown in egypt and israel .  the israelites of bible times may not have grown cotton , but the scriptures mention use of this fiber in persia .  silk was a costly luxury material , likely imported only by traveling merchants from the far east .  wool came in a variety of natural colors , from clear white to dark brown with many shades between ,  says the book jesus and his world .  in addition , wool was often dyed .  an expensive purple dye was extracted from certain mollusks , and various plants , roots , leaves , and insects were used to produce dyes in such colors as red , yellow , blue , and black .  a city in judah  not the same as mount carmel .   ,  his loins . 
my childhood memories are of violent disputes among families in the area .  in our family , women were looked down on and rarely consulted by men .  i was taught that a woman ' s place was in the kitchen , looking after the men and the children .  my childhood was not easy .  when i was ten , my father died as a result of his alcoholism .  five years later , one of my older brothers committed suicide .  the same year , i witnessed a murder during a family feud , and i was deeply shocked .  family members taught me how to use knives and guns and to fight whenever the occasion required it .  a disturbed young man , i started to cover my body with tattoos and to drink .  to pay for my vices , i sold scrap metal and resorted to theft .  several times , i nearly died of overdoses .  i started dealing drugs , so i was constantly armed with knives and guns .  once , i tried to shoot a man , but fortunately the bullet ricocheted off his belt buckle .  frightened pedestrians would cross the street when they saw me approaching .  because of fights , i often spent my weekends at the police station or in the hospital having my wounds stitched up .  as you might expect , i did not treat my wife with respect .  i insulted her and beat her .  we did not do anything together as a couple .  i thought it was enough just to shower her with stolen jewelry .  then , something unexpected happened .  my wife started studying the bible with jehovah ' s witnesses .  after her first study , she stopped smoking , refused to accept any more stolen money , and gave me back her jewelry .  i was furious .  i opposed her bible study and would blow cigarette smoke in her face .  i also ridiculed her throughout our neighborhood .  one night , in a drunken stupor , i set fire to our apartment .  my wife saved me and our five - year - old daughter from the flames .  when i sobered up , i was riddled with guilt .  deep inside , i felt that god could never forgive me .  i remembered once hearing a priest say that the wicked go to hell .  even my psychiatrist told me   it ' s over for you .  you are beyond redemption .  after the fire , we moved in with my wife ' s parents .  when the witnesses came to visit my wife , i asked them ,  can god forgive me for all my sins .  that passage lists forms of conduct that god condemns , but it adds   that is what some of you were .  those words assured me that it was possible to change .  encouraged , i asked the witnesses to study the bible with me twice a week , and i began attending their christian meetings .  i prayed to jehovah constantly .  within a month , i decided to quit drugs and alcohol .  i soon felt that a war had erupted in my body .  i suffered from terrible nightmares , headaches , cramps , and other withdrawal symptoms .  yet , at the same time , i sensed that jehovah was holding me by the hand and strengthening me .  i felt as the apostle paul did .  concerning the help that god gave him , paul wrote   for all things i have the strength through the one who gives me power .  in time , i was also able to quit smoking tobacco .  besides helping me to get control of my life , the bible also improved our family .  my attitude toward my wife changed .  i started to show her more respect and to say  please  and  thank you .  i also started being a real father to our daughter .  after studying the bible for one year , i dedicated my life to jehovah and got baptized , following my wife ' s example .  i am certain that bible principles saved my life .  even my non - witness family members recognize that i would probably have died from substance abuse or would have been killed in a fight .  my family life was completely transformed by bible teachings that pointed out my responsibilities as a husband and father .  we started doing things together as a family .  now , rather than confine my wife to the kitchen , i happily support her in her activities as a full - time evangelizer .  and she is happy to support me in my role as a congregation elder .  jehovah god ' s love and mercy have deeply touched my life .  i have a strong desire to talk about his qualities to those considered hopeless cases , for many viewed me as one .  i know that the bible has the power to help anyone find a clean and purposeful life .  not only has the bible taught me to love and respect others , both men and women , but it has also allowed me to respect myself .  or do you not know that unrighteous people will not inherit god ' s kingdom .  do not be misled .  but you have been washed clean  you have been sanctified  you have been declared righteous in the name of the lord jesus christ and with the spirit of our god .  or  deceived .  see glossary ,  sexual immorality .  or  men who have sex with men .   ,  men who lie with men .  or  the verbally abusive .  whoever does not love has not come to know god , because god is love .  for all things i have the strength through the one who gives me power .  therefore , since we have these promises , beloved ones , let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit , perfecting holiness in the fear of god .  husbands , continue loving your wives , just as the christ also loved the congregation and gave himself up for it ,      and fathers , do not be irritating your children , but go on bringing them up in the discipline and admonition  of jehovah .  or  instruction  guidance .   ,  putting mind in . 
imitate their faith   rebekah rebekah looked out over the rugged landscape as the shadows lengthened .  after weeks of travel , she was finally getting used to the swaying gait of the camel as she sat perched high atop its back .  her childhood home in haran was far behind her , hundreds of miles to the northeast .  she might never see her family again .  questions about her future surely flooded her mind especially now as she neared her journey ' s end .  the caravan had passed through much of canaan and was traversing harsher terrain , the negeb .  rebekah likely saw sheep .  the country here might be too wild and arid for extensive farming , but it provided ample pasturage for grazing .  it was familiar ground to her elderly guide .  he was bursting with good news to tell his master rebekah was to become isaac ' s wife .  rebekah must have wondered , though , what kind of life she would lead in this land .  what would her groom , isaac , be like .  they had never even met .  would he be pleased when he saw her .  and how would she feel about him .  in many parts of the world today , arranged marriages may seem strange .  in other regions , such unions are common .  whatever your background , you may agree that rebekah was heading into the unknown .  she was , in fact , a woman of remarkable courage and faith .  we need both qualities when we face changes in life .  there are other beautiful and rare qualities associated with rebekah ' s faith .  the great change that came into rebekah ' s life began in a way that may have seemed fairly ordinary to her .  she grew up in or near haran , a city in mesopotamia .  her parents were different from most people in haran .  they did not worship the moon - god sin .  rather , their god was jehovah .  rebekah grew up to be a very beautiful young woman , but she was no passive , vain beauty .  she was spirited , and she remained morally pure .  her family was prosperous enough to have servants , but rebekah was not coddled or treated like a princess  she was raised to work hard .  like so many women of those times , rebekah had some heavy chores to do , including fetching water for the family .  early in the evening , she would hoist a vessel onto her shoulder and head off to the spring .  one evening , after she had filled her jar , an elderly man ran up to meet her .  he said to her   please give me a little sip of water from your jar .  it was such a modest request and so politely made .  rebekah could see that the man had traveled far .  so she quickly swung her water jar from her shoulder and let the man drink , not a mere sip , but a real drink of the fresh , cool water .  she noticed that he had a train of ten camels kneeling nearby and that the trough had not yet been filled to water them .  she could see that his kind eyes were watching her attentively , and she wanted to be as generous as she could .  so she said   i will also draw water for your camels until they are done drinking .  note that rebekah offered not merely to give the ten camels a drink but to water them until they were satisfied .  if all ten camels were that thirsty , rebekah faced hours of hard work .  as matters turned out , it seems unlikely that the camels were extremely thirsty .  but did rebekah know that when she made her offer .  she was willing , even eager , to work as hard as need be to show hospitality to this elderly stranger .  he accepted her offer .  then he watched her intently as she ran back and forth , filling and refilling her jar and emptying it into the trough again and again .  rebekah was industrious and hospitable rebekah ' s example speaks eloquently to us today .  we live in an age when selfishness seems to reign supreme .  as foretold , people have become  lovers of themselves ,  unwilling to go out of their way for others .  christians who seek to fight the influence of that trend do well to contemplate the bible ' s picture of that young woman so long ago , running back and forth to the well .  rebekah surely noticed the elderly man ' s gaze upon her .  there was nothing improper in his look  it suggested amazement , wonderment , and joy .  when rebekah was done at last , he gave her gifts precious jewelry .  then he asked   please tell me , whose daughter are you .  is there any room at your father ' s house for us to spend the night .  when she told him of her family , his joy intensified .  perhaps in a rush of enthusiasm , she added   we have both straw and much fodder and also a place to spend the night  a considerable offer , as there were others traveling with the old man .  then she ran off ahead of him to tell her mother what had happened .  clearly , rebekah was raised to be hospitable .  here is another value that seems to be on the wane today and another reason to imitate the faith of this kindhearted young woman .  faith in god should lead us to be hospitable .  jehovah is hospitable , for he is generous to all , and he wants his worshippers to follow suit .  when we are hospitable even to those who may never repay us , we please our heavenly father .  who was that old man at the well .  he was a servant of abraham , the brother of rebekah ' s grandfather .  thus , he was welcome in the home of bethuel , rebekah ' s father .  this servant ' s name was probably eliezer .  the hosts offered him a meal , but he refused to eat until he had disclosed the reason for his visit .  we may imagine him speaking excitedly , for he had just seen powerful evidence that his god , jehovah , was blessing him on this vital mission .  imagine eliezer telling his story as rebekah ' s father , bethuel , as well as her brother laban , listened with rapt attention .  he told them that jehovah had blessed abraham greatly in canaan and that abraham and sarah had a son , isaac , who was to inherit everything .  abraham had given this servant a commission of great importance  he was to seek a wife for isaac among abraham ' s relatives in haran .  abraham made eliezer take an oath that he would not select a wife for isaac from among the women of canaan .  because the canaanites neither respected nor worshipped jehovah god .  abraham knew that jehovah intended in due time to punish those people for their wicked practices .  abraham did not want his beloved son , isaac , to be bound to those people and their immoral ways .  he also knew that his son had a vital role to play in fulfilling god ' s promises .  eliezer went on to tell his hosts that when he arrived at the well near haran , he prayed to jehovah god .  he asked jehovah , in effect , to choose the young woman for isaac to marry .  eliezer asked god to ensure that the girl he wanted isaac to wed would come to the well .  when asked for a drink , she should volunteer not only to give eliezer a drink but to water his camels as well .  and who had come along and done precisely that .  imagine how she might have felt if she overheard the story eliezer told her family members .  bethuel and laban were moved by eliezer ' s account .  they said   this is from jehovah .  as was the custom , they concluded a marriage covenant , betrothing rebekah to isaac .  does that mean , though , that rebekah had no say in the matter .  weeks earlier , eliezer had raised that very issue with abraham , asking   what if the woman is unwilling to come with me .  abraham had responded   this will release you from your oath .  in the house of bethuel too , the young woman ' s preferences mattered .  eliezer was so enthusiastic about the success of his mission that on the following morning , he asked if he could return to canaan with rebekah immediately .  the family , however , wanted her to remain with them for at least another ten days .  finally , they resolved the matter this way   let us call the young woman and inquire of her .  here , then , was a great crossroads in rebekah ' s life .  what would she say .  would she play on the sympathy of her father and brother , pleading for a release from this journey into the unknown .  or would she view it as a privilege to have a part in events that were clearly being guided by jehovah .  when she answered , she revealed how she felt about this sudden , perhaps daunting , change in her life .  she simply said   i am willing to go .  what a remarkable spirit she had .  today , our customs regarding marriage may be quite different , but we can still learn much from rebekah .  what mattered most to her was , not her own preferences , but those of her god , jehovah .  when it comes to marriage today , god ' s word still offers the best guidance available regarding the kind of mate to choose and how to become a good husband or wife .  we do well to follow rebekah ' s example and seek to do things god ' s way .  bethuel ' s family blessed their beloved rebekah .  then she and her childhood nurse , deborah , along with some servant girls , set off with eliezer and his men .  before long , haran was far behind them .  it was likely not a comfortable trip .  rebekah had seen camels aplenty in her life , but we cannot assume that she was an experienced camel rider .  the bible portrays her family as shepherd folk , not as traders who drove caravans of camels .  novice camel riders often complain of discomfort even after a very short ride .  at any rate , rebekah looked ever forward , no doubt trying to learn all she could from eliezer about isaac and his family .  picture the old man talking to her by an evening campfire , telling her of jehovah ' s promise to his friend abraham .  god would raise up from abraham ' s family line an offspring who would bring blessings to all mankind .  think of the awe that filled rebekah ' s heart when she realized that jehovah ' s promise would be fulfilled through her own husband - to - be , isaac hence , through her as well .  rebekah showed a humility that is rare and precious finally , the day came that we described at the outset of this article .  as the caravan traversed the negeb and twilight began to fall over the land , rebekah saw a man out walking in the fields .  he looked thoughtful , contemplative .  she quickly got down from the camel ,  we read perhaps not even waiting for the beast to kneel down and she asked her guide   who is that man there walking in the field to meet us .  when she learned that it was isaac , she covered her head with her shawl .  evidently the gesture was a sign of respect for her future husband .  that kind of submission may strike some today as old - fashioned .  really , though , men as well as women may take a lesson from rebekah ' s humility , for who of us does not need more of that lovely quality .  we may infer , then , that isaac was a man of warm and tender feelings .  what a blessing for such a man to be given a wife who was so industrious , hospitable , and humble .  how did the two get along .  the bible says simply   he fell in love with her .  how can we help but admire her courage , her industriousness , her hospitality , and her humility .  all of us young and old , men and women , married and single do well to imitate her faith .  the account contains no indication that rebekah was detained at the well for hours .  it does not imply that her family was asleep by the time she finished or that anyone came to see why her errand was taking so long .  abraham once intended to bequeath all his property to eliezer in case there was no natural heir , so he was surely the eldest and most trusted of abraham ' s servants .  that is also how the servant in this account is described .  now isaac had come from the direction of be er - la hai - roi , for he was dwelling in the land of the neg eb .  then la ban and be thu el answered   this is from jehovah .  we are not able to say yes or no to you .  or  we are unable to speak bad or good to you .  he had the camels kneel down at a well of water outside the city .  it was about evening , the time when the women would go out to draw water .  even before he finished speaking , re bek ah , who was the daughter of be thu el the son of mil cah the wife of na hor , abraham ' s brother , came out with her water jar on her shoulder .  she went down to the spring , filled her water jar , and then came back up .  at once the servant ran to meet her and said   please give me a little sip of water from your jar .  with that she quickly lowered her jar upon her hand and gave him a drink .  so she quickly emptied her jar into the drinking trough and ran again and again to the well to draw water , and she kept drawing water for all his camels .  but know this , that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here .  is there any room at your father ' s house for us to spend the night .  jehovah has guided me to the house of the brothers of my master .  with that the man came into the house , and he  unharnessed the camels and gave straw and fodder to the camels and water to wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him .  probably referring to laban .  are not also the tax collectors doing the same thing .  be hospitable to one another without grumbling .  at once he said   come , you who are blessed by jehovah .  why do you keep standing out here .  i have made the house ready and a place for the camels .  so la ban said   speak .  probably referring to laban .  then he said   i am abraham ' s servant .   '       but they will return here in the fourth generation , because the error of the am or ites has not yet reached its full measure .  to this god said   your wife sarah will definitely bear you a son , and you must name him isaac .  and i will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant to his offspring  after him .  meaning  laughter .  then he said   jehovah the god of my master abraham , please grant me success this day , and show your loyal love to my master abraham .  then la ban and be thu el answered   this is from jehovah .  we are not able to say yes or no to you .  take her and go , and let her become a wife to the son of your master , just as jehovah has spoken .  when he got up in the morning , he said   send me off to my master .  or  we are unable to speak bad or good to you .  but i said to my master   what if the woman is unwilling to come with me .   '       you will be released from your oath to me if you go to my family and they will not give her to you .  this will release you from your oath .   '       so they said   let us call the young woman and inquire of her .  they called re bek ah and said to her   will you go with this man .  she replied   i am willing to go .  do not become unevenly yoked  with unbelievers .  for what fellowship do righteousness and lawlessness have .  or what sharing does light have with darkness .  or what does a believer  share in common  with an unbeliever .  from a hebrew word meaning  good for nothing .  a reference to satan .  or  a faithful person .  or  what share does a believer have .  in the same way husbands should love their wives as their own bodies .  now i am speaking about christ and the congregation .  or  remain with .  so they sent off their sister re bek ah and her nurse  and abraham ' s servant and his men .  so the servant took re bek ah and went on his way .  that is , her nurse who now served as an attendant .  or  become the mother of thousands of myriads .  or  the cities .  later deb o rah , re bek ah ' s nurse , died and was buried at the foot of beth el under an oak .  so he named it al lon - bac uth .  meaning  oak of weeping .  when jacob saw rachel , the daughter of la ban his mother ' s brother , and the sheep of la ban , jacob immediately approached and rolled the stone away from the mouth of the well and watered the sheep of la ban his mother ' s brother .  or  the cities .  now isaac had come from the direction of be er - la hai - roi , for he was dwelling in the land of the neg eb .  when he looked up , why , he saw that camels were coming .  and the servant said   it is my master .  so she took her veil to cover herself .  after that isaac brought her into the tent of sarah his mother .  thus he took re bek ah as his wife  and he fell in love with her , and isaac found comfort after the loss of his mother .  after some time had passed , a bim e lech king of the phi lis tines was looking out of the window , and he saw isaac displaying affection for  re bek ah his wife .  or  embracing .  a bram replied   sovereign lord jehovah , what will you give me , seeing that i continue childless and the one who will inherit my house is a man of damascus , e li e zer . 
god ' s name   as it appears in an ancient bible manuscript some people say that he has no name , others say that it is god or lord , and still others say that he has dozens of names .  what do you think .  what the bible says  you , whose name is jehovah , you alone are the most high over all the earth .  what else can we learn from the bible .  although god has many titles , he has given himself only one name .  god is not a mystery  he wants us to get to know him .  knowing god ' s name can be the first step to having a friendship with him .  what would you say .  yes   no   it depends what the bible says  you must not take up the name of jehovah your god in a worthless way .  the only time it is wrong to use god ' s name is if this is done disrespectfully .  what else can we learn from the bible .  jesus knew and used god ' s name .  god invites us to address him by name .  god ' s enemies try to make people forget his name .   , published by jehovah ' s witnesses also available at www .  org     may people know that you , whose name is jehovah , you alone are the most high over all the earth .  then god said once more to moses   this is what you are to say to the israelites ,  jehovah the god of your forefathers , the god of abraham , the god of isaac , and the god of jacob , has sent me to you .   '  this is my name forever , and this is how i am to be remembered from generation to generation .  so that they would seek god , if they might grope for him and really find him , although , in fact , he is not far off from each one of us .  draw close to god , and he will draw close to you .  cleanse your hands , you sinners , and purify your hearts , you indecisive ones .  you must not take up the name of jehovah your god in a worthless way , for jehovah will not leave unpunished the one who takes up his name in a worthless way .  for  they are prophesying lies to you in my name .  i have not sent them , '  declares jehovah .   '        righteous father , the world has , indeed , not come to know you , but i know you , and these have come to know that you sent me .  give thanks to jehovah , call on his name , make his deeds known among the peoples .  they intend to make my people forget my name by the dreams they relate to one another , just as their fathers forgot my name because of ba al . 
other bible questions answered why do people die . 
chapter one what is the truth about god .  does god really care about you .  what is god like .  does he have a name .  is it possible to get close to god .  have you ever noticed the way children ask questions .  many start asking as soon as they learn to speak .  with wide , eager eyes , they look up at you and ask such things as  why is the sky blue .  what are the stars made of .  who taught the birds to sing .  you may try hard to answer , but it is not always easy .  even your best answer may lead to yet another question  why .  as we grow up , we keep asking .  we do this in order to find our way , to learn of dangers that we need to avoid , or to satisfy our curiosity .  but many people seem to stop asking questions , especially the most important ones .  at least , they stop searching for the answers .  these are some of the most important questions you can ask .  yet , many people have given up trying to find the answers .  does the bible have the answers .  some feel that its answers are too hard to understand .  others worry that asking questions could lead to shame or embarrassment .  and some decide that such questions are best left to religious leaders and teachers .  what about you .  no doubt you sometimes wonder   what is the purpose of life .  is this life all there is .  what is god really like .   '  it is good to ask such questions , and it is important that you do not give up until you find satisfying , reliable answers .  the famous teacher jesus christ said   keep on asking , and it will be given you  keep on seeking , and you will find  keep on knocking , and it will be opened to you .  despite what other people may have told you , there are answers , and you can find them in the bible .  the answers are not too hard to understand .  better yet , they bring hope and joy .  and they can help you to live a satisfying life right now .  to begin , let us consider a question that has troubled many people .  is god uncaring and hardhearted .  if god cared , '  they reason ,  would not the world be a very different place .   '  we look around and see a world full of war , hatred , and misery .  and as individuals , we get sick , we suffer , we lose loved ones in death .  thus , many say ,  if god cared about us and our problems , would he not prevent such things from happening .  when tragedy strikes , they say that it is god ' s will .  in effect , such teachers blame god for the bad things that happen .  is that the truth about god .  what does the bible really teach .   '  for with evil things god cannot be tried , nor does he himself try anyone .  so god is never the source of the wickedness you see in the world around you .  granted , he does allow bad things to happen .  but there is a big difference between allowing something to happen and causing it .  when the son becomes rebellious and decides to leave home , his father does not stop him .  the son pursues a bad way of life and gets into trouble .  is the father the cause of his son ' s problems .  similarly , god has not stopped humans when they have chosen to pursue a bad course , but he is not the cause of the problems that have resulted .  surely , then , it would be unfair to blame god for all the troubles of mankind .  as our wise and powerful creator , he does not have to explain his reasons to us .  out of love , however , god does this .  but rest assured that god is not responsible for the problems we face .  on the contrary , he gives us the only hope for a solution .  this means that he is pure and clean .  there is no trace of badness in him .  so we can trust him completely .  that is more than we can say for humans , who sometimes become corrupt .  even the most honest human in authority often does not have the power to undo the damage that bad people do .  but god is all - powerful .  he can and will undo all the effects that wickedness has had on mankind .  when god acts , he will do so in a way that will end evil forever .  how does god feel about injustices we face .  well , the bible teaches that god  loves justice .  so he cares deeply about what is right and what is wrong .  he hates all kinds of injustice .  the bible says that god ' s  heart was saddened  when badness filled the world in times past .  god has not changed .  he still hates to see the suffering that is taking place worldwide .  and god hates to see people suffer .  he cares for you ,  the bible says .  here is further proof .  the bible teaches that man was made in the image of god .  we thus have good qualities because god has good qualities .  for example , does it bother you to see innocent people suffer .  if you care about such injustices , be assured that god feels even more strongly about them .  that also reflects god .  the bible teaches that  god is love .  we love because god loves .  would love move you to end the suffering and the injustice you see in the world .  if you had the power to do that , would you do it .  of course you would .  you can be just as sure that god will end suffering and injustice .  the promises mentioned in the preface of this book are not mere dreams or idle hopes .  god ' s promises are sure to come true .  in order to put faith in such promises , though , you need to know more about the god who has made them .  would you not tell the person your name .  does god have a name .  many religions answer that his name is  god  or  lord ,  but those are not personal names .  they are titles , just as  king  and  president  are titles .  the bible teaches that god has many titles .  god  and  lord  are among them .  however , the bible also teaches that god has a personal name  jehovah .  if your bible translation does not contain that name , you may want to consult the appendix article  the divine name its use and its meaning  to learn why that is so .  the truth is that god ' s name appears thousands of times in ancient bible manuscripts .  so jehovah wants you to know his name and to use it .  in a sense , he is using the bible to introduce himself to you .  his name , jehovah , means that god can fulfill any promise he makes and can carry out any purpose he has in mind .  god ' s name is unique , one of a kind .  it belongs only to him .  in a number of ways , jehovah is unique .  how is that so .  similarly , jehovah alone is referred to as  the almighty .  righteous and true are your ways , king of eternity .  the title  the almighty  teaches us that jehovah is the most powerful being there is .  his power is unmatched  it is supreme .  and the title  king of eternity  reminds us that jehovah is unique in another sense .  he alone has always existed .  that thought inspires awe , does it not .  everything that you can think of from the invisible spirit creatures in heaven to the stars that fill the night sky to the fruit that grows on the trees to the fish that swim in the oceans and rivers all of it exists because jehovah is the creator .  can you be close to jehovah .  they fear that god is too high for them , that they could never get close to him or even matter to such a lofty god .  but is this idea correct .  the bible teaches just the opposite .  it says of jehovah   in fact , he is not far off from each one of us .  the bible even urges us   draw close to god , and he will draw close to you .  to begin with , continue doing what you are doing now learning about god .  jesus said   this means everlasting life , their coming to know you , the only true god , and the one whom you sent , jesus christ .  yes , the bible teaches that learning about jehovah and jesus leads to  everlasting life .  as already noted ,  god is love .  jehovah also has many other beautiful and appealing qualities .  for example , the bible says that jehovah is  a god merciful and compassionate , slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and truth .  he is  good and ready to forgive .  god is patient .  he is loyal .  as you read more in the bible , you will see how jehovah has shown that he has these and many other appealing qualities .  by learning about him through the pages of the bible , however , you can come to know him as a person .  as the psalmist said , you can  gaze upon the pleasantness of jehovah .  the more you learn about jehovah , the more real he will become to you and the more reason you will have to love him and feel close to him .  not only does our life come from him but he wants the best life possible for us just as any loving father would want for his children .  the bible also teaches that humans can become jehovah ' s friends .  imagine you can become a friend of the creator of the universe .  they may worry that you will change your beliefs .  but do not let anyone stop you from forming the best friendship you can ever have .  it can be a little humbling to ask for help , but do not hold back because of embarrassment .  jesus said that it is good to be humble , like a little child .  and children , as we know , ask a lot of questions .  god wants you to find the answers .  the bible praises some who were eager to learn about god .  they checked carefully in the scriptures to make sure that what they were learning was the truth .  it is different from any other book .  in what way .  the next chapter will consider that subject .  footnote  there is more information on the meaning and the pronunciation of god ' s name in the appendix article  the divine name its use and its meaning .  what the bible teaches   god cares about you personally .  god ' s personal name is jehovah .  jehovah invites you to draw close to him .  jehovah is loving and merciful .  why is it often good to ask questions .  why do many stop trying to find answers to the questions that matter most .  what are some of the most important questions we can ask in life , and why should we seek the answers .  why do many people think that god is uncaring when it comes to human suffering .  how have religious teachers led many to think that god is hardhearted .  what does the bible really teach about the trials we may suffer .  how might you illustrate the difference between allowing wickedness to exist and causing it .  why would it be unfair for us to find fault with god ' s decision to allow mankind to pursue a wayward course .  why can we trust that god will undo all the effects of wickedness .  how does god feel about injustice .  how does god feel about your suffering .  why do we have good qualities such as love , and how does love affect our view of the world .  why can you be sure that god will really do something about world problems .  what is god ' s name , and why should we use it .  what does the name jehovah mean .  what may we learn about jehovah from the following titles     the almighty .  king of eternity .  why do some people feel that they could never get close to god , but what does the bible teach .  how can we begin to draw close to god , and with what benefit .  what qualities of god are most appealing to you .  does our inability to see god prevent us from getting close to him .  what may some well - meaning people urge you to do , but what should you do .  why should you continue to ask questions about what you are learning .  what is the subject of the next chapter . 
