the four horsemen how their ride affects you
i loved baseball more than anything .  what a beautiful woman you are 
it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit www .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures .  this magazine , the watchtower , honors jehovah god , the ruler of the universe .  it comforts people with the good news that god ' s heavenly kingdom will soon end all wickedness and transform the earth into a paradise .  it promotes faith in jesus christ , who died so that we might gain everlasting life and who is now ruling as king of god ' s kingdom .  it adheres to the bible as its authority . 
the ride of the four horsemen of the apocalypse is one of the best - known scenes from the book of revelation .  some are scared by it .  others are intrigued .  note what the bible says about such prophecies   happy is the one who reads aloud and those who hear the words of this prophecy .  this issue of the watchtower explains how the ride of the four horsemen can mean good news for us .  happy is the one who reads aloud and those who hear the words of this prophecy and who observe the things written in it , for the appointed time is near . 
the four horsemen  how their ride affects you they burst forth , hooves thundering .  the four mighty horses and their riders make a picture so vivid that it almost seems to leap from the pages of the bible .  the first horse is white  its rider a glorious , newly crowned king .  behind him comes a horse the color of fire , bearing a rider who takes peace away from all the earth .  there follows a third horse , black as midnight , carrying a rider who holds aloft a pair of scales as a doleful message is proclaimed about a lack of basic foodstuffs .  the fourth horse is a sickly pale color , a harbinger of disease and other lethal threats , ridden by death itself .  and the grave , the common grave of mankind , follows closely , reaping a terrible harvest of lives .  i was scared the first time i read about the four horsemen .  i felt that judgment day was coming and that since i was not ready , i would not survive .  i was fascinated by the four distinctive riders on different - colored horses .  once i understood what the vision meant , it all made sense .  can you identify with the way crystal felt about the four horsemen of the apocalypse .  or do you feel the way ed did .  in either case , the epic ride of those horsemen forms one of the best - known scenes in revelation , the last book of the bible .  did you know that you can benefit personally by understanding this vision .  god promises that you can find real happiness by reading , learning from , and living by the things written in that prophetic book .  while some are frightened by the vision of the four horsemen , it is not designed to scare you .  in fact , millions have found that this vision strengthens their faith and even points them to the hope of a bright future .  it can mean the same for you .  please read on .  and i saw when the lamb opened one of the seven seals , and i heard one of the four living creatures say with a voice like thunder   come .  a white horse , and the one seated on it had a bow  and a crown was given him , and he went out conquering and to complete his conquest .  and i saw , and look .  a black horse , and the one seated on it had a pair of scales in his hand .  a pale horse , and the one seated on it had the name death .  and the grave  was closely following him .  and authority was given them over the fourth part of the earth , to kill with a long sword and with food shortage and with deadly plague and by the wild beasts of the earth .  a roman silver coin that equaled a day ' s wage .  or  hades ,  that is , the common grave of mankind .  see glossary .  a revelation  by jesus christ , which god gave him , to show his slaves the things that must shortly take place .  or  a disclosure  an uncovering . 
the four horsemen  how their ride affects you the four horsemen may seem mysterious and terrifying , but that does not have to be the case .  because the bible and the events of modern history help us to identify clearly what each horseman pictures .  and although their ride has signaled calamity on earth , it can also mean good news for you and your family .  first , let us determine the identity of each horseman .  the vision begins this way   i saw , and look .  a white horse , and the one seated on it had a bow  and a crown was given him , and he went out conquering and to complete his conquest .  who is the rider of the white horse .  the key to his identity is found in the same bible book , revelation , which later identifies this heavenly rider as  the word of god .  that title , the word , belongs to jesus christ , for he acts as god ' s spokesman .  in addition , he is called  king of kings and lord of lords  and is described as  faithful and true .  clearly , he has authority to act as a warrior - king , and he does not wield his power in any corrupt or abusive way .  yet , some questions arise .  who gives jesus the authority to conquer .  the prophet daniel saw a vision in which the messiah , likened to  a son of man ,  was given  rulership , honor , and a kingdom  by none other than  the ancient of days ,  jehovah god .  thus , it is almighty god who grants jesus the power and right to rule and execute judgment .  the white horse is an appropriate symbol for warfare justly carried out by god ' s son , for the scriptures often use the color white to symbolize righteousness .  when did the horsemen begin their ride .  note that the first rider , jesus , begins his ride when he receives a crown .  when was jesus crowned as king in heaven .  it was not when he returned to heaven after his death .  the bible shows that a period of waiting began back then .  jesus gave his followers a means of recognizing the end of that waiting period and the beginning of his reign in heaven .  he said that at the beginning of his rule , world conditions would take a decisive turn for the worse .  there would be warfare , food shortages , and pestilences .  because at that time , jesus began ruling in heaven , not on earth .  war then broke out in heaven , and the newly installed king , jesus , referred to as michael , cast satan and his demons to the earth .  confined here , satan has been full of rage ever since , knowing that his days are numbered .  indeed , it will not be long before god will carry out his will against satan here on the earth .  now , let us see how the other three horsemen help to confirm that we are , in fact , living during the troubled  last days .  unlike the first horseman , who clearly pictures a specific individual , the three that follow represent global conditions that have swept across human society .  another came out , a fiery - colored horse , and it was granted to the one seated on it to take peace away from the earth so that they should slaughter one another , and he was given a great sword .  this rider represents warfare .  notice that he takes peace away from not just a few nations but the whole earth .  it was followed by a second world war , which was even more destructive .  in addition , vast numbers of other individuals suffered debilitating injuries .  to what extent does warfare characterize the present time .  for the first time in history , mankind appears to have the ability to extinguish all human life .  even so - called peacekeeping organizations , such as the united nations , have not been able to stop the rider of the red horse .  i saw , and look .  a black horse , and the one seated on it had a pair of scales in his hand .  i heard what sounded like a voice in the midst of the four living creatures say   a quart of wheat for a denarius and three quarts of barley for a denarius  and do not harm the olive oil and the wine .  this rider represents famine .  we find here a picture of food rationing so severe that a quart   of wheat would cost one denarius , a whole day ' s wage in the first century .  the same coin could purchase three quarts   of barley , a grain viewed as inferior to wheat .  how far would that go to feed a large family .  people are then warned to be frugal even with daily foodstuffs , aptly pictured by such basic staples of that time and culture as olive oil and wine .  another report states   hunger kills more people every year than aids , malaria and tuberculosis combined .  in spite of many earnest efforts to feed the hungry , the rider of the black horse continues to ride .  i saw , and look .  a pale horse , and the one seated on it had the name death .  and the grave was closely following him .  and authority was given them over the fourth part of the earth , to kill with a long sword and with food shortage and with deadly plague and by the wild beasts of the earth .  the fourth rider represents death due to plague and other causes .  but the spanish flu was just the beginning .  to this day , the lives of millions are cut short by aids , tuberculosis , and malaria , despite intensive medical research .  the result is the same , death  whether due to war , famine , or plague .  the grave relentlessly gathers up the victims , offering no hope .  the present times of trouble will soon end .  soon , during armageddon , jesus will remove satan ' s influence and will destroy the devil ' s human supporters .  jesus will not only terminate the ride of the other three horsemen but even reverse the effects of their destructive ride .  consider what the bible promises .  instead of war , peace will reign .  jehovah  is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth .  he breaks the bow and shatters the spear .  as for peace - loving people ,  they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace .  instead of famine , there will be plenty of food .  there will be an abundance of grain on the earth  on the top of the mountains it will overflow .  jesus will soon reverse the effects of the other three horsemen instead of plague and death , there will be perfect health and eternal life for all .  god  will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  when jesus lived on earth , he provided a heartwarming preview of future conditions under his rulership .  he promoted peace , miraculously fed thousands , cured the sick , and even raised the dead to life again .  jehovah ' s witnesses would be delighted to show you in your bible how you can be ready when the ride of those horsemen ends .  will you accept an invitation to learn more .  food shortages have ended or ruined the lives of tens of millions .  the grave gathers up the victims .  and i saw , and look .  a white horse , and the one seated on it had a bow  and a crown was given him , and he went out conquering and to complete his conquest .  i saw heaven opened , and look .  a white horse .  and the one seated on it is called faithful and true , and he judges and carries on war in righteousness .  or  royal headbands .  or possibly ,  sprinkled .  in the beginning was the word , and the word was with god , and the word was a god .  or  was divine .  so the word became flesh and resided among us , and we had a view of his glory , a glory such as belongs to an only - begotten son from a father  and he was full of divine favor  and truth .  or  of undeserved kindness .  on his outer garment , yes , on his thigh , he has a name written , king of kings and lord of lords .  and i saw , and look .  a white horse , and the one seated on it had a bow  and a crown was given him , and he went out conquering and to complete his conquest .  i kept watching in the visions of the night , and look .  with the clouds of the heavens , someone like a son of man was coming  and he gained access to the ancient of days , and they brought him up close before that one .  his rulership is an everlasting rulership that will not pass away , and his kingdom will not be destroyed .  nevertheless , you do have a few individuals  in sar dis who did not defile their garments , and they will walk with me in white ones , because they are worthy .   ,  a few names .  after this i saw , and look .  a great crowd , which no man was able to number , out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues ,  standing before the throne and before the lamb , dressed in white robes  and there were palm branches in their hands .  or  languages .  in response one of the elders said to me   these who are dressed in the white robes , who are they and where did they come from .  and he said to me   these are the ones who come out of the great tribulation , and they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the lamb .  and i saw , and look .  a white horse , and the one seated on it had a bow  and a crown was given him , and he went out conquering and to complete his conquest .  while he was sitting on the mount of olives , the disciples approached him privately , saying   tell us , when will these things be , and what will be the sign of your presence  and of the conclusion of the system of things .  see glossary .  or  the age .  see glossary .  for nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom , and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another .  then he said to them   nation will rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom .  but know this , that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here .  meaning  who is like god .  or possibly ,  but it  that is , the dragon  was defeated .  on this account be glad , you heavens and you who reside in them .  woe for the earth and for the sea , because the devil has come down to you , having great anger , knowing that he has a short period of time .  let your kingdom come .  let your will take place , as in heaven , also on earth .  another came out , a fiery - colored horse , and it was granted to the one seated on it to take peace away from the earth so that they should slaughter one another , and he was given a great sword .  when he opened the third seal , i heard the third living creature say   come .  and i saw , and look .  a black horse , and the one seated on it had a pair of scales in his hand .  a roman silver coin that equaled a day ' s wage .  after he had agreed with the workers for a de nar i us  a day , he sent them into his vineyard .  and i saw , and look .  a pale horse , and the one seated on it had the name death .  and the grave  was closely following him .  and authority was given them over the fourth part of the earth , to kill with a long sword and with food shortage and with deadly plague and by the wild beasts of the earth .  or  hades ,  that is , the common grave of mankind .  see glossary .  and i saw , and look .  a white horse , and the one seated on it had a bow  and a crown was given him , and he went out conquering and to complete his conquest .  so down the great dragon was hurled , the original serpent , the one called devil and satan , who is misleading the entire inhabited earth  he was hurled down to the earth , and his angels were hurled down with him .  on this account be glad , you heavens and you who reside in them .  woe for the earth and for the sea , because the devil has come down to you , having great anger , knowing that he has a short period of time .  and i saw an angel coming down out of heaven with the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand .  after this he must be released for a little while .  he is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth .  he breaks the bow and shatters the spear  he burns the military wagons  with fire .  or possibly ,  the shields .  but the meek will possess the earth , and they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace .  there will be an abundance of grain on the earth  on the top of the mountains it will overflow .  his fruit will flourish as in leb a non , and in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth .  and he will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  the former things have passed away .  having come to know this , jesus departed from there .  many also followed him , and he cured them all ,      and he instructed the crowds to recline on the grass .  then he took the five loaves and two fish , and looking up to heaven , he said a blessing , and after breaking the loaves , he gave them to the disciples , and the disciples gave them to the crowds .  then jesus said to him   return your sword to its place , for all those who take up the sword will perish by the sword .  when he had said these things , he cried out with a loud voice   laz a rus , come out .  jesus said to them   free him and let him go .  and i saw when the lamb opened one of the seven seals , and i heard one of the four living creatures say with a voice like thunder   come .  a white horse , and the one seated on it had a bow  and a crown was given him , and he went out conquering and to complete his conquest .  when he opened the second seal , i heard the second living creature say   come .  when he opened the third seal , i heard the third living creature say   come .  and i saw , and look .  a black horse , and the one seated on it had a pair of scales in his hand .  a roman silver coin that equaled a day ' s wage .  when he opened the fourth seal , i heard the voice of the fourth living creature say   come .  a pale horse , and the one seated on it had the name death .  and the grave  was closely following him .  and authority was given them over the fourth part of the earth , to kill with a long sword and with food shortage and with deadly plague and by the wild beasts of the earth .  or  hades ,  that is , the common grave of mankind .  see glossary . 
this cuneiform tablet has the name tattannu written on one of its edges is there archaeological evidence supporting the bible record .  one man who did not make the list in that article was tattenai .  let us review his brief role in the bible record .  jerusalem was once part of a vast persian empire .  the city lay in an area that the persians called across - the - river , that is , to the west of the euphrates .  after conquering babylonia , the persians released jewish captives and authorized them to rebuild jehovah ' s temple in jerusalem .  enemies of the jews , however , opposed the project and used it as a pretext to accuse the jews of rebelling against persia .  during the reign of darius i   , a persian official named tattenai led an inquiry into the matter .  the bible calls him  the governor of the region beyond the river .  a number of cuneiform tablets bearing the name tattenai have survived as part of what may have been a family archive .  it identifies a witness to the transaction as a servant of  tattannu , governor of across - the - river   the same tattenai who appears in the bible book of ezra .  what was this man ' s role .   , cyrus the great reorganized his dominions into provinces , one of which was called babylon and across - the - river .  the province was later split into two parts , one of which was simply called across - the - river .  it included coele - syria , phoenicia , samaria , and judah and was likely ruled from damascus .  after traveling to jerusalem to investigate the accusation of rebellion , tattenai reported to darius that the jews claimed to have received authorization from cyrus to rebuild jehovah ' s temple .  investigations in the royal archives substantiated that claim .  so tattenai was ordered not to interfere , and he obeyed .  to be sure ,  tattenai the governor of the region beyond the river  merits only a footnote in history .  note , though , that the scriptures mention him and apply to him exactly the right title .  that fact gives us yet another bit of evidence that archaeology repeatedly supports the bible ' s historical accuracy .   '    or possibly ,  who is in jerusalem .   ,  the men of his place .  at that time tat te nai the governor of the region beyond the river  and she thar - boz e nai and their colleagues came to them and asked them   who issued an order to you to build this house and to finish this structure .  or  of trans - euphrates .  or  these beams .   ,  the eye of their god was on .  this is the response they gave us   we are the servants of the god of the heavens and the earth , and we are rebuilding the house that was built many years ago , which a great king of israel built and finished .  it was then that king da ri us issued an order , and they made an investigation in the archives  where the treasures were deposited in babylon .   ,  the house of the records .  or  jurisdictional district .  so now tat te nai the governor of the region beyond the river ,  she thar - boz e nai , and your colleagues , the lesser governors of the region beyond the river stay away from there .  the governor of the jews and the elders of the jews will rebuild that house of god in its former place .  or  of trans - euphrates .  then tat te nai the governor of the region beyond the river , she thar - boz e nai , and their colleagues promptly carried out everything that king da ri us had ordered . 
my parents had eight children , of whom i was the seventh .  my father died when i was eight years old .  thereafter , my mother raised us children as a single parent .  baseball was always part of my life .  i enjoyed the sport as a child .  in my late teens , i joined an amateur league team .  however , because my mother had poor health at the time and i was looking after her , i did not want to live in nicaragua .  so i turned down that offer .  later , another scout invited me to play for costa rica ' s national baseball team , made up of selected amateur league players .  this time , i accepted the offer .  i loved to hear the crowds chant my name .  regrettably , i also led an immoral lifestyle .  although i had only one girlfriend , i was always involved with other women .  i drank heavily too .  one day i got so drunk that when i woke up in my bed the next day , i couldn ' t remember how i had returned home .  i also gambled on domino games and played the lottery .  while i was living that way , my mother became one of jehovah ' s witnesses .  she tried to interest me in her faith , but she was unsuccessful at first because i was completely absorbed in my sport .  if i was on the field training during mealtimes , i wouldn ' t even feel hungry .  my mind was focused only on the game .  i loved baseball more than anything .  after recuperating , i quit playing professionally .  nonetheless , i stayed involved with organized baseball by training players in an amateur league team near my home .  as i sat in the audience , i couldn ' t help but notice the contrast between the respectful conduct i saw among the witnesses and the rowdy behavior i had seen among the crowds at baseball games .  what i saw at that convention moved me to start studying the bible with the witnesses and attending their congregation meetings .  i was impressed by many of the bible teachings that i learned .  for example , jesus foretold that in the last days , his disciples would preach the good news of god ' s kingdom worldwide .  i also learned that true christians do not carry out their ministry for financial gain .  jesus said   you received free , give free .  as i studied the bible , i compared what it says with what i saw among jehovah ' s witnesses .  i admired their tireless efforts to spread the good news of god ' s kingdom worldwide .  i saw in them the giving spirit that jesus commanded christians to display .  it took me some time , however , to follow through decisively .  for example , for many years i had played my  lucky  number each week in the national lottery .  however , i learned from the bible that god condemns worshippers of the  god of good luck ,  as well as greedy persons .  so i decided to stop gambling .  the first sunday after i quit playing the lottery , my  lucky  number won .  people mocked me because i did not play that week , and they strongly pressured me to play again , but i didn ' t .  i never went back to gambling .  i faced another test of my  new personality  on the very day that i was baptized at a convention of jehovah ' s witnesses .  that evening , i returned to the hotel where i was staying and found my ex - girlfriend waiting outside the door to my room .  come on , sammy ,  she urged me .  let ' s have a good time .  but i immediately replied ,  no .  i reminded her that i was now living by the moral standards of the bible .  she blurted out .  then she trivialized the bible ' s view of sexual immorality and insisted that we resume our relationship .  however , i simply went into my room and locked the door behind me .  i feel as if i could write a book about the benefits i have received from following the bible ' s guidance .  some of those benefits are that i now have many genuine friends , a life full of purpose , and true happiness .  i still enjoy baseball , but i have adjusted my values .  in baseball i gained prestige and money , but these things did not last .  however , my relationship with god and the brotherhood that i am a part of will last forever .  the bible says   the world is passing away and so is its desire , but the one who does the will of god remains forever .  now i love jehovah god and his people more than anything .  and this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations , and then the end will come .  cure the sick , raise up the dead , make lepers clean , expel demons .  you received free , give free .  jesus looked at him and felt love for him and said ,  one thing is missing about you  go , sell what things you have and give to the poor , and you will have treasure in heaven  and come be my follower .  but you are among those forsaking jehovah , those forgetting my holy mountain , those setting a table for the god of good luck , and those filling up cups of mixed wine for the god of destiny .  deaden , therefore , your body members that are on the earth as respects sexual immorality ,  uncleanness , uncontrolled sexual passion , hurtful desire , and greediness , which is idolatry .  greek , por nei a .  see glossary .  and should put on the new personality that was created according to god ' s will in true righteousness and loyalty .  flee from sexual immorality .  every other sin that a man may commit is outside his body , but whoever practices sexual immorality is sinning against his own body .  greek , por nei a .  see glossary .  furthermore , the world is passing away and so is its desire , but the one who does the will of god remains forever . 
imitate their faith   sarah sarah stood in the middle of the room and looked around .  picture a middle eastern woman with a striking pair of dark , expressive eyes .  did a trace of sadness show there .  if so , it would not be hard to understand why .  there was a lot of history in this house .  she and her beloved husband , abraham , had spent countless happy hours here .  together , they had made it a home .  they lived in ur , a prosperous city with plenty of artisans , craftsmen , and merchants .  so they surely had possessions .  but sarah ' s home was more to her than a mere place in which to keep her belongings .  here she and her husband had shared years of joys and disappointments .  here they had prayed countless times to their beloved god , jehovah .  sarah had ample reason to love this place .  yet , sarah was willing to move away from all that was familiar .  what led her to such a sweeping change in her life .  and what can we today learn from her faith .  sarah likely grew up in ur .  today , all that is left of that city is a desolate ruin .  but in sarah ' s day , merchants '  vessels plied the waters and canals of the euphrates river , bringing precious goods from far and wide to this thriving city .  people thronged ur ' s narrow , winding streets , ships jostled one another along its wharves , and goods overflowed in its bazaars .  imagine sarah growing up in that bustling city , coming to know many of its people by name .  they surely remembered her too , for she was an extraordinarily beautiful woman .  she also had a large family there .  sarah is known in the bible for her great faith  but it was not faith in the moon - god widely worshipped in ur , where a tower to that god loomed over the city .  rather , sarah worshipped the true god , jehovah .  the inspired record does not say how she gained that faith .  her father , for a time at least , was an idolater .  at any rate , she married abraham , a man ten years her senior .  he later became known as  the father of all those having faith .  together they built a fine , strong marriage , one that was marked by respect , good communication , and a mutual willingness to work through difficult problems together .  above all , though , their union was marked by their love for their god .  sarah loved her husband dearly , and the two set up their home among their relatives in ur .  before long , though , they faced a disappointment .  the bible tells us that sarah  was barren  she had no child .  in that culture and time , sarah ' s condition was particularly trying .  but sarah stayed true to her god and to her husband .  their fatherless nephew lot evidently became like a son to them .  life went on  until the day when everything changed .  abraham came to sarah brimming with excitement .  he could hardly believe what had just happened .  the god they worshipped had just spoken to him  had even appeared to him , no doubt by means of an angel .  imagine sarah , her lovely eyes intent on her husband , breathlessly asking   what did he say to you .  please tell me .  perhaps abraham first sat down to collect his thoughts  then he told her what jehovah had said   go out from your land and from your relatives and come into the land that i will show you .  after the initial excitement abated , they contemplated the assignment jehovah was putting before them .  they were to leave their stable , comfortable life and live as nomads .  how would sarah respond .  no doubt abraham watched her keenly .  would she willingly support him in such a great change in their life .  the choice facing sarah may sound foreign to us .  we might think ,  well , god has never asked me or my spouse to do anything like that .   '  nonetheless , do we not all face a similar choice .  we live in a materialistic world , one that may urge us to put first in life our own comforts , our possessions , or our sense of security .  but the bible urges us to make another choice  to seek spiritual things first , to put pleasing god ahead of pleasing ourselves .  as we contemplate what sarah did , we might ask ourselves ,  what choice will i make in life .   '  as sarah packed her things , she faced the dilemma of what to keep and what to leave behind .  she could keep no item that was too big for a caravan of donkeys and camels to carry , nothing that would be impractical in a nomadic life .  no doubt many of their possessions would have to be sold or given away .  gone , too , would be the conveniences of city living  the ready access to markets or bazaars where she could shop for grain , meats , fruit , clothing , and other necessities and comforts .  sarah ' s faith moved her to leave the comforts of home behind perhaps it was harder still for sarah to give up her home itself .  if it was like many of the houses that archaeologists have uncovered in ur , sarah faced the loss of some very real comforts .  some of those houses had over a dozen rooms , as well as freshwater fountains and plumbing .  even a humble house might offer a solid roof , walls , and a door that could be bolted shut .  could a tent offer similar protection against thieves .  or against lions , leopards , bears , and wolves  all of which were common in the bible lands in those times .  and what of family .  whom would sarah be leaving behind .  god ' s command to  go out from your land and from your relatives  may have been especially challenging for her .  a warm , affectionate woman , she may well have had brothers and sisters , nieces and nephews , and aunts and uncles to whom she was very attached and whom she might never see again .  yet , sarah bravely went forward , day by day , getting ready for departure .  despite the challenges , sarah was packed and ready to go on the appointed day .  terah , as family patriarch , was to accompany abraham and sarah , though he was about two centuries old .  sarah would no doubt have much to do with caring for this elderly parent .  lot too would join them as they obeyed jehovah and  went out of the land of the chaldeans .  at haran , the family settled for a time .  terah may have been ailing at this point , unable to travel farther .  at some point before the next phase of their journey , jehovah spoke again to abraham , telling him once more to leave this land and go to the land that jehovah would show him .  in this instance , though , god added a thrilling promise   i will make you a great nation .  how could a nation come from abraham .  would he take another wife .  polygamy was a common practice in those days , so sarah may well have wondered about that .  at any rate , they left haran and pressed onward .  note , though , who was now with them .  the account tells us that abraham ' s family left with the wealth they had gained as well as  the people whom they had acquired in haran .  who were those people .  servants , most likely .  however , abraham and sarah doubtless shared their faith with those who were willing to listen .  some ancient jewish paraphrases thus say that the people referred to in this verse were also proselytes , people who had joined abraham and sarah in worshipping jehovah .  if so , sarah ' s deep faith no doubt made her very convincing when she spoke to others about her god and her hope .  that is useful for us to contemplate , for we live in an age when faith and hope are in desperately short supply .  when you learn something good from the bible , could you share it with someone .   , they made their way south into the land jehovah had promised them .  picture sarah turning to look this way and that , taken by the beauty , the variety , and the pleasant climate of the land .  near the big trees of moreh , near shechem , jehovah appeared to abraham again , this time saying   to your offspring i am going to give this land .  ah , this expression ,  offspring ,  would have rich meaning for abraham .  it surely made him think back to the garden of eden , where jehovah had foretold that an offspring would one day destroy satan .  jehovah had already told abraham that the nation that came from him would open the way for blessings to people of all the earth .  still , the family was not immune to the troubles of this world .  a famine struck the land of canaan , and abraham decided to lead his family south toward egypt .  however , he sensed a particular danger in that region .  so he spoke to sarah   please listen .  i know what a beautiful woman you are .  so when the egyptians see you , they will surely say ,  this is his wife .   '  then they will kill me but keep you alive .  please say you are my sister , so that it may go well with me because of you , and my life will be spared .  why did abraham make such an unusual request .  abraham was neither a liar nor a coward , as some critics have charged .  sarah was , in truth , his half sister .  and abraham ' s caution was well - founded .  abraham and sarah knew that nothing was more important than god ' s purpose to produce a special offspring and nation through abraham , so abraham ' s safety became of paramount importance .  what is more , archaeological evidence has shown that it was not unheard of for men of power in egypt to abduct a man ' s wife and kill the husband .  so abraham acted wisely , and sarah humbly cooperated with his decision .  before long , events proved that abraham ' s fears were well - founded  some of pharaoh ' s princes noticed sarah ' s stunning beauty  a remarkable trait at her age .  they reported on her to pharaoh , and he ordered that the woman be taken .  it is hard to imagine the anguish of abraham or the fears that must have afflicted sarah .  however , it seems that she was treated , not as a hostage , but as an honored guest .  perhaps pharaoh planned to woo her and impress her with his wealth and then negotiate with her  brother  to obtain her as a wife .  think of sarah , looking out over the egyptian landscape from a palace window or balcony .  how did she feel , living within walls again , with a roof over her head , with fine foods put before her .  was she tempted by a life of luxury  perhaps a life even more opulent than anything she had known back in ur .  imagine how pleased satan would have been if she had sought to abandon abraham and become the wife of this pharaoh .  but sarah did nothing of the kind .  she was loyal to her husband , to her marriage , and to her god .  if only every married person in today ' s immoral world would show such loyalty .  can you imitate sarah ' s loyalty in your dealings with your own loved ones and friends .  despite the temptations of pharaoh ' s palace , sarah was loyal to her marriage mate jehovah intervened to protect this beloved woman , sending plagues against pharaoh and his household .  when pharaoh somehow learned that sarah was abraham ' s wife , he sent her back to her husband and asked the whole family group to leave egypt .  how delighted abraham was to get his dear wife back .  remember that he had lovingly said to her   i know what a beautiful woman you are .  but he appreciated another kind of beauty in sarah far more  a beauty that ran deeper than her mere appearance .  sarah had true inner beauty , the kind that jehovah values .  that is a kind of beauty that all of us can cultivate .  if we put spiritual things ahead of material things , try to share our knowledge of god with others , and loyally uphold god ' s moral standards in the face of temptations , we will imitate the faith of sarah .  terah was father to both of them , but they had different mothers .  while such a marriage is improper today , it is important to keep in mind how different things were back then .  humans were closer to the perfection that adam and eve had enjoyed but lost .  for such robust people , marriage between close relatives evidently did not present genetic dangers to offspring .  at that time , the mosaic law outlawed all sexual unions between close relatives .  and he received a sign namely , circumcision as a seal  of the righteousness by the faith he had while in his uncircumcised state , so that he might be the father of all those having faith while uncircumcised , in order for righteousness to be counted to them   or  guarantee  confirmation .  now sar ai was barren  she had no child .  stephen replied   men , brothers and fathers , listen .   '        keep on , then , seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness , and all these other things will be added to you .  te rah then took a bram his son and lot his grandson , the son of ha ran , and sar ai his daughter - in - law , the wife of a bram his son , and they went with him out of ur of the chal de ans to go to the land of ca naan .  in time they came to ha ran and began dwelling there .  then he went out of the land of the chal de ans and took up residence in ha ran .  and from there , after his father died , god caused him to resettle in this land where you now dwell .  i will make you a great nation , and i will bless you , and i will make your name great , and you will become a blessing .  or  will obtain a blessing for themselves .  a bram took his wife sar ai and lot the son of his brother and all the goods that they had accumulated and the people  whom they had acquired in ha ran , and they set out for the land of ca naan .  when they reached the land of ca naan ,  or  souls .  and i will put enmity  between you and the woman and between your offspring  and her offspring .  he will crush  your head , and you will strike  him in the heel .  or  hostility .  or  bruise  strike .  or  bruise  crush .  i will make you a great nation , and i will bless you , and i will make your name great , and you will become a blessing .  or  will obtain a blessing for themselves .  a bram traveled through the land as far as the site of she chem , near the big trees of mo reh .  at that time the ca naan ites were in the land .  so he built an altar there to jehovah , who had appeared to him .  now a famine arose in the land , and a bram went down toward egypt to reside there for a while ,  because the famine in the land was severe .  i know what a beautiful woman you are .   '  then they will kill me but keep you alive .  or  to live there as a foreigner .  or  my soul will stay alive .  as soon as a bram entered egypt , the egyptians noticed that the woman was very beautiful .  then jehovah struck phar aoh and his household with severe plagues because of sar ai , a bram ' s wife .  why did you not tell me that she was your wife .  here is your wife .  take her and go .  meaning  father is high .  meaning  father of a crowd    father of many .  then god said to abraham   as for your wife sar ai ,  you must not call her sar ai , because sarah  will become her name .  possibly meaning  contentious .  meaning  princess .  and besides , she really is my sister , the daughter of my father but not the daughter of my mother , and she became my wife .  no man among you should approach any of his close relatives to have sexual relations .  i am jehovah .   ,  to uncover nakedness ,  here and in subsequent occurrences . 
what would you say .  yes   no   maybe what the bible says  i know that jehovah will defend the lowly and give justice to the poor .  god ' s kingdom will bring true justice to the earth .  what else can we learn from the bible .  god sees the world ' s current injustice , and he will correct it .  justice from god will bring peace and security to the earth .  some people believe that god has blessed or cursed specific groups of people , while others believe that god treats all people the same .  what do you think .  what the bible says  god is not partial , but in every nation the man who fears him and does what is right is acceptable to him .  in god ' s view , all people are equal .  what else can we learn from the bible .  the bible has  good news  for  every nation and tribe and tongue and people .   , published by jehovah ' s witnesses also available at www .  org     i know that jehovah will defend the lowly and give justice to the poor .  if you see any oppression of the poor and a violation of justice and righteousness in your district , do not be surprised about the matter .  for that high official is being watched by one who is higher than he is , and there are others who are still higher than them .  then justice will reside in the wilderness , and righteousness will dwell in the orchard .  and i saw another angel flying in midheaven ,  and he had everlasting good news to declare to those who dwell on the earth , to every nation and tribe and tongue  and people .  or  in midair  overhead .  or  language . 
the book of revelation  what does it mean . 
then the people of the land were continually discouraging  the people of judah and disheartening them from building .  they are rebuilding the rebellious and wicked city , and they are finishing the walls and repairing the foundations .  you will find in the book of records and learn that this city is a rebellious city , injurious to kings and provinces ,  and within it have been those stirring up sedition from ancient times .  that is why this city was destroyed .   ,  weakening the hands of .  or possibly ,  it was written in aramaic and then translated .  or  in trans - euphrates .  or  we receive our salary from the palace .  or  jurisdictional districts . 
chapter three what is god ' s purpose for the earth .  what is god ' s purpose for mankind .  how has god been challenged .  what will life on earth be like in the future .  god ' s purpose for the earth is really wonderful .  jehovah wants the earth to be filled with happy , healthy people .  the bible says that  jehovah god planted a garden in eden  and that he  made to grow .  every tree that was pleasing to look at and good for food .  after god created the first man and woman , adam and eve , he put them in that lovely home and told them   be fruitful and become many , fill the earth and subdue it .  so it was god ' s purpose that humans have children , extend the boundaries of that garden home earth wide , and take care of the animals .  i have spoken ,  god declares ,  and i will also carry it out .  yes , what god purposes he will surely do .  he says that he  did not create  the earth  simply for nothing , but formed it to be inhabited .  what kind of people did god want to live on the earth .  and for how long did he want them to live here .  the bible answers   the righteous will possess the earth , and they will live forever on it .  people now get sick and die  they even fight and kill one another .  something went wrong .  surely , however , god did not purpose that the earth should be as we see it today .  what happened .  why has god ' s purpose not been fulfilled .  no history book written by man can tell us because the trouble started in heaven .  he is described as  the serpent ,  but he was not a mere animal .  the last book of the bible identifies him as  the one called devil and satan , who is misleading the entire inhabited earth .  he is also called  the original serpent .  this powerful angel , or invisible spirit creature , used a serpent to speak to eve , even as a skilled person can make it seem that his voice is coming from a nearby doll or dummy .  that spirit person had no doubt been present when god prepared the earth for humans .  put simply , one of the powerful spirit sons of god turned himself into the devil .  how was this possible .  well , today a person who was once decent and honest may become a thief .  how does that happen .  the person may allow a wrong desire to develop in his heart .  if he keeps thinking about it , that wrong desire may become very strong .  then if the opportunity presents itself , he may act upon the bad desire that he has been thinking about .  he apparently heard god tell adam and eve to have children and to fill the earth with their offspring .  why , all these humans could worship me rather than god .   '  satan evidently thought .  so a wrong desire built up in his heart .  eventually , he took action to deceive eve by telling her lies about god .  he thus became a  devil ,  which means  slanderer .  at the same time , he became  satan ,  which means  opposer .  as a result , they eventually died , as god had said they would if they disobeyed .  since adam became imperfect when he sinned , all his offspring inherited sin from him .  the situation might be illustrated with a pan used for baking bread .  if the pan has a dent in it , what happens to each loaf of bread made in the pan .  each loaf has a dent , or an imperfection , in it .  similarly , each human has inherited a  dent  of imperfection from adam .  that is why all humans grow old and die .  he was challenging jehovah ' s way of ruling .  in effect , satan was saying   god is a bad ruler .  he tells lies and holds back good things from his subjects .  humans do not need to have god ruling over them .  they can decide for themselves what is good and what is bad .  and they will be better off under my rulership .   '  how would god handle such an insulting challenge .  some think that god should simply have put the rebels to death .  but would that have answered satan ' s challenge .  would it have proved that god ' s way of ruling is right .  he decided that time was needed to answer satan ' s challenge in a satisfying way and to prove that the devil is a liar .  so god determined that he would permit humans to rule themselves for some time under satan ' s influence .  now , though , it is good to think about this  were adam and eve right to believe satan , who had never done anything good for them .  was it right for them to believe that jehovah , who had given them everything they had , is a cruel liar .  what would you have done .  yes , you have the opportunity to support jehovah ' s side in answer to satan ' s challenge .  you can accept jehovah as your ruler and help to show that satan is a liar .  sadly , only a few among the billions of people in this world make such a choice .  this raises an important question , does the bible really teach that satan rules this world .  who rules this world .  in some miraculous way , satan once showed jesus  all the kingdoms of the world and their glory .  satan then promised jesus   all these things i will give you if you fall down and do an act of worship to me .  think about this .  would that offer have been a temptation to jesus if satan was not the ruler of these kingdoms .  jesus did not deny that all these worldly governments were satan ' s .  surely , jesus would have done that if satan was not the power behind them .  yet , nowhere does the bible say that either jehovah god or jesus christ is ruler of this world .  in fact , jesus specifically referred to satan as  the ruler of this world .  the bible even refers to satan the devil as  the god of this system of things .  regarding this opposer , or satan , the christian apostle john wrote   the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one .  it is overrun with warring armies , dishonest politicians , hypocritical religious leaders , and hardened criminals .  the world as a whole is beyond reform .  the bible reveals that the time is near when god will eliminate the wicked world during his war of armageddon .  this will make way for a righteous new world .  long ago , the bible foretold   a child has been born to us , a son has been given to us  and the government will rest on his shoulder .  his name will be called .  prince of peace .  to the increase of his government and to peace , there will be no end .  regarding this government , jesus taught his followers to pray   let your kingdom come .  let your will take place , as in heaven , also on earth .  as we will see later in this book , god ' s kingdom will soon remove all the governments of this world , and it itself will replace all of them .  then god ' s kingdom will usher in an earthly paradise .  a new world is at hand .  sometimes when the bible speaks of  the earth ,  it means the people who live on the earth .  so the righteous  new earth  is a society of people who receive god ' s approval .  now consider from the bible the blessings that will be enjoyed by those who qualify for that wonderful gift from god in the coming earthly paradise .  the wicked will be no more .  but the meek will possess the earth .  peace will exist because  god will bring an end to wars throughout the earth .   '    then  the righteous will flourish , and peace will abound until the moon is no more   and that means forever .  as long as the israelites in bible times obeyed god , they lived in security .  how wonderful it will be to enjoy similar security in paradise .  there will be an abundance of grain on the earth ,  sang the psalmist .  on the top of the mountains it will overflow .  jehovah god will bless his righteous ones , and  the earth will give its produce .  lovely new homes and gardens will occupy land that had once been ruined by sinful humans .  as time passes , parts of the earth already subdued will expand until the whole globe is as beautiful and productive as the garden of eden .  and god will never fail to  open  his  hand and satisfy the desire of every living thing .  wild and domestic animals will feed together .  even a little child will have nothing to fear from animals that are now dangerous .  as ruler of god ' s heavenly kingdom , jesus will do healing on a far grander scale than when he was on earth .  then  no resident will say   i am sick .  all those sleeping in death who are in god ' s memory will be brought back to life .  in fact ,  there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous .  it was to the coming paradise on earth that jesus pointed when he promised the criminal who died alongside him   you will be with me in paradise .  it is vital that we learn more about jesus christ , through whom all these blessings will be made possible .  what the bible teaches   god ' s purpose to make the earth a paradise will be fulfilled .  satan now rules this world .  in the coming new world , god will bestow many blessings on mankind .  what is god ' s purpose for the earth .  how do we know that god ' s purpose for the earth will be fulfilled .  what does the bible say about humans living forever .  what sad conditions now exist on earth , and what questions does this raise .  who actually spoke to eve by means of a serpent .  how might a formerly decent , honest person become a thief .  how did a powerful spirit son of god become satan the devil .  why did adam and eve die .  why do all of adam ' s offspring grow old and die .  what challenge did satan evidently make .  why did god not destroy the rebels immediately .  how can you support jehovah ' s side in answer to satan ' s challenge .  how does a temptation of jesus reveal that satan is the ruler of this world .  what else proves that satan is the ruler of this world .  why is there a need for a new world .  whom has god selected to be ruler of his kingdom , and how was this foretold .  what is the  new earth .  what is a priceless gift from god to those whom he approves , and what must we do to receive it .  how can we be sure that there will be peace and security everywhere on earth .  why do we know that food will be abundant in god ' s new world .  why can we be sure that the whole earth will become a paradise .  what shows that peace will exist between humans and animals .  what will happen to sickness .  why will the resurrection bring joy to our hearts .  how do you feel about living in paradise on earth . 
