teen depression why .  what can help .  table of contents


introduction


teen depression why .  what can help . 
it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit www .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures . 
the compound heat shield of the saharan silver ant . 
according to reports , the number of teens being diagnosed with depression is increasing at an alarming rate .  what can be done about the problem .  this issue of awake .  discusses some suggestions for teens who suffer from depression and for their parents as well , to help them offer their children comfort and support . 
cover subject  when i have a bout of depression ,  says anna ,   i have no motivation to do anything , not even the things i usually love to do .  all i want to do is sleep .  i often feel that i am unlovable , worthless , and a burden to others .  i thought about suicide ,  recalls julia .  i didn ' t really want to die .  i just wanted to stop feeling this way .  i ' m normally a caring person , but when i ' m depressed , i care little about anyone or anything .  anna and julia were in their early teens when they first experienced depression .  while other young people might occasionally feel down , anna and julia had periods of depression that persisted for weeks or months at a time .  it ' s like being stuck in a deep , dark hole with no way out ,  anna says .  you feel like you are losing your mind , losing who you are .  anna and julia ' s situation is not uncommon .  the symptoms of depression can appear during adolescence and may include changes in sleep patterns , appetite , and weight .  feelings of despair , hopelessness , sadness , and worthlessness may also appear .  other signs include social withdrawal , trouble concentrating or remembering , suicidal thoughts or actions , and medically unexplained symptoms .  when mental - health professionals suspect depression , they usually look for groups of symptoms that persist for weeks and that disrupt a person ' s everyday life .  according to who ,  depression results from a complex interaction of social , psychological and biological factors .  these may include the following .  physical factors .  as was true in julia ' s case , depression often runs in families , suggesting that genetics can play a role , perhaps affecting chemical activity in the brain .  other physical risk factors include cardiovascular disease and changing hormone levels , as well as ongoing substance abuse , which may intensify depression , if not give rise to it .  while a little stress can be healthy , chronic or excessive stress can be physically and psychologically harmful , sometimes to the point of plunging a susceptible , or biologically vulnerable , teen into depression .  that said , the exact causes of depression remain unclear and may involve a combination of factors , as mentioned earlier .  stress - related factors linked to depression may include parental divorce or separation , the death of a loved one , physical or sexual abuse , a serious accident , illness , or a learning disability especially if a child feels rejected as a result .  a related factor may be unrealistically high parental expectations , perhaps in regard to scholastic achievement .  other possible causes are bullying , uncertainty about the future , emotional estrangement by a depressed parent , and parental unpredictability .  if depression results , what may help a teen to cope .  moderate to severe depression is usually managed with medication and counseling by a mental - health professional .  jesus christ said   those who are strong do not need a physician , but those who are ill do .  and illness can affect any part of our body , including our brain .  lifestyle changes may also be advisable because our mind and body are closely connected .  if you suffer from depression , take reasonable measures to care for your physical and mental health .  for instance , eat wholesome meals , get sufficient sleep , and exercise regularly .  exercise releases chemicals that can lift your mood , increase your energy , and improve your sleep .  if possible , try to recognize triggers and early warning signs of a depressive mood and create a suitable plan of action .  confide in someone you trust .  a supportive network of close family members and friends may help you to cope more effectively with your depression , possibly reducing symptoms .  record your thoughts and feelings in a journal a practice that helped julia , quoted earlier .  above all , be sure to address your spiritual need .  this can greatly improve your outlook on life .  jesus christ said   happy are those conscious of their spiritual need .  eat well , stay active , and get sufficient sleep you can find comfort by satisfying your spiritual need both anna and julia attest to jesus '  words .  anna says   spiritual activities make me focus on other people , not just on my own problems .  that isn ' t always easy , but i am much happier as a result .  julia finds comfort in prayer and bible reading .  pouring out my heart to god in prayer calms me ,  she says .  and the bible helps me to see that i am valuable in god ' s eyes and that he really cares about me .  bible reading also gives me a positive view of the future .  as our creator , jehovah god fully understands how our upbringing , experiences in life , and genetic makeup influence our outlook and emotions .  he is therefore able to supply needed support and comfort , perhaps doing so through compassionate and understanding fellow humans .  moreover , the time will come when god will heal us of all our illnesses , physical or mental .  yes , the bible promises that god  will wipe out every tear from  our  eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  how comforting and reassuring that is .  if you would like to learn more about god ' s purpose for mankind and the earth , please visit us at jw .  there you will find an excellent online bible , as well as articles on a broad range of topics , including depression .  does not endorse any specific treatment or therapy .  recognize that depressed teens may find it hard to express their feelings or may not understand what is happening to them .  they may not even be aware of the symptoms of depression .  teens tend to express their depression in ways different from those of adults , so be alert to major changes in your child ' s behavior , eating habits , moods , sleep patterns , or social interactions especially if the changes persist for weeks .  take seriously any comments or hints regarding suicide .  if you suspect depression   , consider getting a professional diagnosis .  help your teen adhere to the doctor ' s prescribed treatment , and consult the doctor if you see no improvement or observe unpleasant side effects .  have a stable family routine for eating , exercising , and sleeping .  maintain good communication with your teen , and help him or her to deal with any stigma associated with depression .  because depression can make one feel alone , ashamed , or worthless , regularly reassure your teen of your love .  if you suffer from depression , a practical suggestion to help you control your thoughts and feelings is to create what has been called an emotional first - aid kit .  the kit , which can be adjusted as you see fit , might include the items on this page .  one factor may be the stress resulting from emotional , physical , or sexual harassment or abuse , which girls often have to cope with .  when a scary external world and a chaotic internal world collide ,  wrote professional counselor sharon hersh ,  the result is often overwhelming and confusing .  girls may also be unduly influenced by media portrayals of the  ideal  body .  a girl who sees herself as physically undesirable or who is overly concerned about peer approval may be more vulnerable to depression .  on hearing this , jesus said to them   those who are strong do not need a physician , but those who are ill do .  i came to call , not righteous people , but sinners .  happy are those conscious of their spiritual need ,  since the kingdom of the heavens belongs to them .  or  those who are beggars for the spirit .  and no resident  will say   i am sick .  the people dwelling in the land will be pardoned for their error .  or  inhabitant .  and he will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  the former things have passed away .  jehovah is close to the brokenhearted  he saves those who are crushed in spirit .  or  are discouraged .  the sacrifices pleasing to god are a broken spirit  a heart broken and crushed , o god , you will not reject .  or  despise .  when anxieties  overwhelmed me ,  you comforted and soothed me .  or  disquieting thoughts .  or  became many inside of me .  or  your consolations soothed my soul .  or  your minds  your thoughts . 
when someone gives you a beaming smile , how do you respond .  most likely you smile back .  and you probably feel happier too .  yes , genuine smiles whether from friends or total strangers are infectious , and they evoke good feelings .  a woman named magdalena commented   georg , my late husband , had a warm smile .  when our eyes met , i felt relaxed and secure .  a sincere smile indicates positive emotions , such as amusement , happiness , and pleasure .  indeed ,  smiling .  seems built into our nature ,  noted an article in observer , an online journal of the association for psychological science .  even newborns , the article said , are able to  interpret facial expressions with great precision .  the article also stated   not only do people deduce useful information from smiles , they also use this knowledge to direct their own behavior .  researchers at harvard university in the united states studied a group of elderly patients and their responses to the facial expressions of health - care providers .  when the caregivers '  facial expressions  were perceived as more warm , caring , concerned , and empathetic ,  said the researchers , the patients felt more satisfied and their physical and mental well - being improved .  the opposite was the case when the caregivers '  nonverbal communications distanced them from patients .  when you smile you may also be doing yourself a favor .  the benefits , studies suggest , include increased confidence and happiness and reduced feelings of stress .  frowning , by comparison , may have the opposite effect .  magdalena , mentioned earlier , was one of jehovah ' s witnesses during world war ii .  she was sent with other family members to the ravensbrück concentration camp in germany for refusing to adopt nazi ideology .  at times the guards stopped us from speaking with other prisoners ,  she recalled .  but they had no control over our facial expressions .  just seeing my mother and sister smile boosted my morale and strengthened my resolve to endure .  perhaps you feel that life ' s anxieties give you little cause for smiling .  remember , though , that feelings are usually preceded by thoughts .  so , hard though it may be , why not try to dwell on positive , pleasant things whenever possible .  bible reading and prayer have helped many people to do just that .  in fact , the words  happy  and  joy  and their derivatives occur hundreds of times in the bible .  why not read a page or two each day .  you too may find yourself smiling more often .  also , do not wait for others to smile at you .  take the initiative  add a little happiness to someone else ' s day .  yes , see your smile for what it really is a divine gift that enriches you and the people who see it .  all the days of the afflicted one are bad , but the one with a cheerful  heart has a continual feast .  finally , brothers , whatever things are true , whatever things are of serious concern , whatever things are righteous , whatever things are chaste ,  whatever things are lovable , whatever things are well - spoken - of , whatever things are virtuous , and whatever things are praiseworthy , continue considering  these things .  or  thinking about  meditating on .  happy are those conscious of their spiritual need ,  since the kingdom of the heavens belongs to them .  or  those who are beggars for the spirit .  or  your minds  your thoughts .  make your face shine  upon your servant , and teach me your regulations . 
a wise woman respects her conscience the bible ' s viewpoint tens of millions of unborn babies are deliberately aborted each year a number that exceeds the population of many countries .  women who have an abortion do so for various reasons , including economic hardship , relationship problems , the desire for freedom to pursue further education or a career , or not wanting to be a single mother .  others , however , view abortion as morally wrong a violation of the trust that has been placed upon a pregnant woman .  in god ' s eyes , life especially human life is sacred .  this principle applies to a baby growing in the womb , a place designed by god to be a safe haven for a developing child .  you kept me screened off in my mother ' s womb ,  said a bible writer .  he added   your eyes even saw me as an embryo  all its parts were written in your book regarding the days when they were formed .  god ' s view of the life of an unborn child is also reflected in his law to the nation of israel and in our god - given conscience .  god ' s law stated that a person who assaulted a pregnant woman and killed her unborn child was subject to the death penalty the killer paying with his own life for the life he took .  of course , the judges had to take into account motives and circumstances .  humans are also endowed with a conscience .  when a woman heeds her conscience , or inner voice , by respecting the life of her unborn child , her conscience rewards her .  if she violates her conscience , it may trouble her or even condemn her .  indeed , studies indicate that women who have an abortion also have an increased risk of anxiety and depression .  what , though , if the prospect of rearing a child seems daunting , especially when the pregnancy is not planned .  note god ' s reassuring promise to those who loyally live by his standards   with someone loyal you act in loyalty  with the blameless man  or woman  you deal blamelessly .  we also read   jehovah loves justice , and he will not abandon his loyal ones .  their conscience is bearing witness with them , and by their own thoughts they are being accused or even excused .  ruth , a single mother , said   i already had three young children and felt unable to care for four .  yet , after having an abortion , i felt i had done something horrible .  but had she done something that god could not forgive .  jesus christ reflected god ' s mind on matters when he said   i have come to call , not righteous people , but sinners to repentance .  yes , when we feel genuine remorse for a wrong we have committed and we repent and ask god to forgive us , he willingly does so even for serious sins .  along with a cleansed conscience , god gives the contrite one peace of mind when he or she humbly turns to him in prayer .  after studying the bible and pouring out her heart to god , ruth gained that inner peace .  she learned that with god  there is true forgiveness .  god  has not dealt with us according to our sins , nor has he repaid us what our errors deserve .  if at childbirth a couple must choose between the life of the mother and that of the child , the couple must decide .  that said , in many developed lands , medical advances have made such a situation very rare .  anyone shedding man ' s blood , by man will his own blood be shed , for in god ' s image he made man .  with you is the source of life  by your light we can see light .  for you produced my kidneys  you kept me screened off  in my mother ' s womb .  or possibly ,  wove me together .  your eyes even saw me as an embryo  all its parts were written in your book regarding the days when they were formed , before any of them existed .  if men should struggle with each other and they hurt a pregnant woman and she gives birth prematurely  but no fatality  results , the offender must pay the damages imposed on him by the husband of the woman  and he must pay it through the judges .   ,  and her children come out .  or  serious injury .  or  soul for soul .   ,  without lying in wait .  you must take no ransom for the life  of a murderer who is deserving to die , for he should be put to death without fail .  for when people of the nations , who do not have law , do by nature the things of the law , these people , although not having law , are a law to themselves .  with someone loyal you act in loyalty  with the blameless man you deal blamelessly       for jehovah loves justice , and he will not abandon his loyal ones .  they will always be guarded  but the descendants of the wicked will be done away with .  they are the very ones who demonstrate the matter of the law to be written in their hearts , while their conscience is bearing witness with them , and by  their own thoughts they are being accused or even excused .  i have come to call , not righteous people , but sinners to repentance .  come , now , and let us set matters straight between us ,  says jehovah .  though your sins are like scarlet , they will be made as white as snow  though they are as red as crimson cloth , they will become like wool .  the sacrifices pleasing to god are a broken spirit  a heart broken and crushed , o god , you will not reject .  or  despise .  or  your minds  your thoughts .  for with you there is true forgiveness , so that you may be held in awe .   ,  be feared .  he has not dealt with us according to our sins , nor has he repaid us what our errors deserve . 
more than half a million homes were destroyed .  sadly , one witness and her two children died .  the earthquake occurred when the congregations in the most devastated area were having their christian meetings ,  said a witness named michelle .  had it occurred when many were at home , there would no doubt have been more casualties .  why were those attending meetings spared .  kingdom hall design was a big factor .  modern kingdom halls in nepal are designed to be earthquake resistant .  man bahadur , who is involved in kingdom hall construction , states   we have often been asked why we lay such solid foundations for relatively small structures .  now we see the benefits .  after the earthquake , approval was given for kingdom halls to become shelters .  despite aftershocks , jehovah ' s witnesses and their neighbors felt secure there .  jehovah ' s witnesses and neighbors took refuge in kingdom halls christian elders quickly began to search for congregation members who were unaccounted for .  the elders put the welfare of the congregation above their own ,  said a witness named babita .  we were touched to see such love .  the day after the earthquake , the three members of the committee overseeing the work of jehovah ' s witnesses in nepal , in conjunction with traveling ministers , or circuit overseers , began visiting congregations to assess needs and support the local elders .  gary breaux , from the world headquarters of jehovah ' s witnesses , visited quake victims six days after the earthquake , gary breaux , from the witnesses '  world headquarters in the united states , came to nepal with his wife , ruby .  because of the confusion in kathmandu , as well as the aftershocks ,  said reuben , a member of the aforementioned committee ,  we were unsure if brother breaux would be able to come .  but he was determined to get here and he did .  the local witnesses deeply appreciated his visit .  silas , who works in the witnesses '  office in nepal , said   as soon as our telephone service was restored , the phone began to ring day and night .  fellow witnesses around the world were concerned about us .  although some spoke languages we couldn ' t understand , we sensed their love for us and their eagerness to help .  a medical team of witnesses from europe assisted victims for several days after the quake , local witnesses brought food to kingdom halls to share with those in need .  additionally , a disaster relief committee was established , and soon supplies began to pour in , mainly from bangladesh , india , and japan .  within days , a medical team of witnesses from europe arrived and set up their base at one of the kingdom halls .  they immediately got to work , not only checking the physical condition of quake victims but also helping them deal with any emotional trauma .  expressing the feelings of many , a woman named uttara said   the earthquake was horrible and scary .  but afterward , we felt closer to our spiritual family than ever before .  yes , the quake did not weaken the love that jehovah ' s people have for him and for one another .  instead , it strengthened that love . 
help for the family   marriage expressions of appreciation are essential to a successful marriage .  many husbands and wives , however , stop noticing their partner ' s good traits , much less expressing appreciation for them .  in the book emotional infidelity , one counselor observes that many couples who see him  are much more concerned with what is not happening  in their marriage  than with what is .  they ' re in my office to tell me what needs to change , not what needs to stay the same .  the mistake every one of these couples makes is that they fail to show love through appreciation .  how can you and your spouse avoid that pitfall .  expressions of appreciation can offset marital stress .  when a husband and wife make an effort to notice and acknowledge each other ' s good qualities , their relationship typically improves .  even severe tension can be alleviated when spouses feel appreciated by each other .  many women tend to overlook the incredible pressure there is on men to provide for their families ,  says the aforementioned book , emotional infidelity .  in some societies , that pressure may even exist in dual - income families .  for husbands .  men often underestimate a wife ' s efforts to support the household , whether through working , raising children , or homemaking .  fiona ,  who has been married for about three years , says   we all make mistakes , and when i do , i feel bad about myself .  so when my husband tells me i ' ve done well at something around the house for example , with chores i realize that he still loves me despite my flaws .  i also feel supported and happier about myself .  in contrast , when a spouse feels taken for granted , it can threaten the very integrity of a marriage .  when you don ' t feel appreciated by your spouse ,  says a wife named valerie ,  it ' s easy to be drawn to someone who does make you feel appreciated .  be observant .  during the coming week , notice positive traits that your spouse displays .  also , watch for things that he or she does to keep your household running smoothly things that perhaps until now you have taken for granted .  at the end of the week , make a list of   traits that you appreciate in your spouse and   things that he or she did for the benefit of your family .  why is being observant necessary .  after you ' ve been married for a few years ,  says a wife named erika ,  you can start to take your spouse for granted .  you stop noticing the good things he does and tend to focus more on what he isn ' t doing .  ask yourself   do i take my spouse ' s hard work for granted .   '  for example , if your husband fixes things around the house , do you hold back from thanking him because you feel that it is his duty to take care of such chores .  if you are a husband , do you feel that your wife ' s efforts in child - rearing do not merit commendation because she is simply doing what is expected of her .  make it a goal to notice and be grateful for all the efforts both large and small that your spouse makes for the benefit of your family .  give praise generously .  the bible does not just say that we should be thankful but says   show yourselves thankful .  so try to get into the habit of thanking your spouse .  a husband named james says ,  when my wife expresses appreciation for the things i do , it makes me work harder to be a better husband and to increase the effort i put into the marriage .  husbands and wives who express appreciation for each other strengthen their relationship .  i believe that many marriages could be saved if spouses kept to the fore what they like about each other ,  says a husband named michael .  when problems arise , they ' d be less inclined to end the marriage , because they have constantly been reminded of what a good thing they have .  whatever things are praiseworthy , continue considering these things .  in showing honor to one another , take the initiative .  let your words always be gracious .  daily life is full of challenges that can sap me of physical and emotional energy .  but tia constantly tells me how much she appreciates my efforts as a husband .  her words of appreciation really help to recharge me .  i have a full schedule involving an emotionally taxing job .  when ethan tells me that he is proud of me for all i do and when he demonstrates that appreciation by listening when i tell him about my day i feel a wave of comfort .  it reassures me of his love .  finally , brothers , whatever things are true , whatever things are of serious concern , whatever things are righteous , whatever things are chaste ,  whatever things are lovable , whatever things are well - spoken - of , whatever things are virtuous , and whatever things are praiseworthy , continue considering  these things .  or  thinking about  meditating on .  in brotherly love have tender affection for one another .  in showing honor to one another , take the lead .  or  initiative .  also , let the peace of the christ rule in your hearts ,  for you were called to that peace in one body .  and show yourselves thankful .  or  control your hearts .  let your words always be gracious , seasoned with salt , so that you will know how you should answer each person .  finally , brothers , whatever things are true , whatever things are of serious concern , whatever things are righteous , whatever things are chaste ,  whatever things are lovable , whatever things are well - spoken - of , whatever things are virtuous , and whatever things are praiseworthy , continue considering  these things .  or  thinking about  meditating on .  in brotherly love have tender affection for one another .  in showing honor to one another , take the lead .  or  initiative .  let your words always be gracious , seasoned with salt , so that you will know how you should answer each person . 
was it designed .  the saharan silver ant   is one of the most heat - tolerant land animals known .  when the midday saharan sun forces the ant ' s predators to seek shade , the ant makes brief forays from its burrow in search of food , which consists of other insects killed by the intense heat .  the hairs , which give the ant a silvery sheen , are tiny tubes with a triangular cross section .  their two outward - facing surfaces have microscopic corrugations that run the length of the hair , while the inward - facing surface is smooth .  this design serves two functions .  first , it enables the hairs to reflect solar radiation in the visible and near - infrared ranges .  second , it helps the ant to dissipate body heat absorbed from the environment .  meanwhile , the ant ' s hairless underside reflects radiation that is in the mid - infrared range and emanates from the desert floor .  inspired by that tiny creature , researchers are working to develop special coatings that enhance passive cooling that is , cooling without the aid of fans or other devices .  what do you think .  did the compound heat shield of the saharan silver ant come about by evolution .  or was it designed . 
articles young people ask how can i deal with anxiety .  the tips in this article can help you make anxiety work for you rather than against you .  frequently asked questions do jehovah ' s witnesses assist with disaster relief .  learn how jehovah ' s witnesses provide practical assistance to fellow believers and others . 
why do we appreciate beauty .  in ways that are still a mystery , the human brain perceives beauty .  the bible does not explain how this happens , but it does reveal why we have an aesthetic sense  god endowed us with his attributes .  he also created the highly complex human body , giving it amazing form and function .  in that regard , an ancient songwriter said   i praise you  god  because in an awe - inspiring way i am wonderfully made .  today , though , attitudes toward physical beauty are often unbalanced a trend promoted by the fashion industry and the popular media .  according to the book body image , a number of studies in western cultures  suggest that body image is the single most important factor in a person ' s overall self - image .  such a narrow focus , however , can mean ignoring something far more important an individual ' s heart .  hand in hand with the focus on the body is growing overemphasis on sexuality , especially that of women .  the bible firmly encourages us to avoid being influenced by such trends and for good reason .  do not let your adornment be external .   , but let it be the secret person of the heart in the incorruptible adornment of the quiet and mild spirit , which is of great value in the eyes of god .  why is it wise to have a balanced view .  concerning physical beauty , some say   if you ' ve got it , flaunt it .  in cultures where such thinking is common , adolescent and even preadolescent girls learn to view themselves  as objects of others '  desires .   , to be looked at and evaluated for their appearance ,  says a report by the apa .  that view can be most harmful .  in fact , it has become a major social and health concern that , according to the apa , may lead to  a host of negative emotional consequences .  these may include anxiety and  even self - disgust .   , eating disorders , low self - esteem , and depression or depressed mood .  remove troublesome things from your heart , and ward off harmful things from your body , for youth and the prime of life are futility .  what attitude reflects a sound mind .  the bible associates  soundness of mind ,  or sensibleness , with modesty .  consider  modest people are not superficial or vain , obsessing about their looks , but they have a healthy , balanced view of themselves .  they also consider the feelings of others and thus earn admiration , respect and , above all , god ' s favor .  moreover , they are more likely to make true friends and attract potential marriage mates who are interested not just in physical intimacy but also in a lasting and happy union .  for many good reasons , then , the bible exhorts us to focus on the inner person  the secret person of the heart .  inner beauty truly is ageless .  in fact , it can improve with time .  hence , whether young or old , people who heed the bible ' s superior advice will find the key not only to the beauty that lasts but also to dignity and contentment .  charm may be false , and beauty may be fleeting , but the woman who fears jehovah will be praised . 
do you have  a feast constantly .  all the days of the afflicted one are bad  but the one that is good at heart has a feast constantly .  what do those words mean .  they refer to one ' s mental and emotional state .  the afflicted one  dwells on the negative an outlook that makes his days  bad ,  or dismal .  by contrast , the one who  is good at heart  tries to focus on the positive an attitude that fosters inner joy , giving him  a feast constantly .  we all have problems that can rob us of a measure of happiness .  yet , we may be able to do certain things that help us to retain our joy through difficult times .  consider what the bible says .  do not let anxieties over tomorrow weigh you down today .  jesus christ said   do not worry about tomorrow  it will have enough worries of its own .  there is no need to add to the troubles each day brings .  try to focus on the good things that have happened to you .  in fact , when you feel down , why not make a list of those good things and reflect on them .  also , do not dwell on past mistakes or bad deeds .  learn from them , and move on .  be like a driver who glances into his rearview mirror but does not focus on it .  keep in mind , too , that  there is the true forgiveness with  god .  when anxieties weigh you down , confide in someone who may be able to cheer you up .  that  good word  may come from a family member or a trusted friend someone who is not cynical or pessimistic but  is loving all the time .  the wise sayings found in the bible have helped many to find more joy in life , even through trying times .  may those precious sayings help you too . 
for those who have never suffered the loss of an unborn baby in this way , it may be difficult to imagine the feelings of those who have .  some parents grieve such losses intensely .  one mother lost five children before they were born .  in time , she felt blessed to raise two healthy sons .  yet , she remembered each loss .  to the end of her days , she knew just how old her stillborn and miscarried babies would have been had they survived .  do such christians have a basis for hoping in a resurrection to restore what they have lost .  the simple answer to the question is that we do not know .  the bible never directly addresses the matter of a resurrection for babies who were stillborn or lost through a miscarriage .  nonetheless , god ' s word does contain principles that bear on the question and that may offer a measure of comfort .  let us consider two related questions .  first , from jehovah ' s viewpoint , when does the life of a human begin at conception or at birth .  second , how does jehovah view the unborn as unique individuals or as mere collections of cells and tissue in a woman ' s womb .  bible principles give clear answers to both questions .  the mosaic law clearly revealed that life begins , not at birth , but much earlier .  it showed that killing a fetus could incur the death penalty .  note this law   you must give soul for soul .  thus , the unborn child in the womb is alive and is a living soul .  understanding that timeless truth has helped millions of christians to repudiate the practice of abortion , seeing it as a serious sin against god .  granted , the unborn child is alive , but what value does jehovah place on that life .  the law cited above demanded that an adult be put to death for causing the death of an unborn child .  clearly , then , the life of an unborn child has great value in god ' s eyes .  further , numerous passages in the scriptures reveal that jehovah sees the unborn as distinct individuals .  for example , king david was inspired to say of jehovah   you kept me screened off in the belly of my mother .  your eyes saw even the embryo of me , and in your book all its parts were down in writing , as regards the days when they were formed .  jehovah also sees that the unborn have distinct traits and may have great potential for the future .  while isaac ' s wife rebekah was pregnant with twins , jehovah uttered a prophecy about the two boys struggling in her womb , suggesting that he already saw traits in them that would have far - reaching effects .  the case of john the baptist is an interesting one as well .  the gospel account says   as elizabeth heard the greeting of mary , the infant in her womb leaped  and elizabeth was filled with holy spirit .  in describing this incident , the physician luke used a greek word that could refer either to a fetus or to a baby after its birth .  he used the same word in referring to the baby jesus lying in the manger .  on the whole , does the bible give us a basis for drawing a big distinction between a baby in the womb and one that has drawn its first breath .  it does not seem so .  and that accords with the findings of modern science .  for example , researchers have learned that a baby in the womb is able to sense and respond to external stimuli .  thus , it is not surprising that an expectant mother develops such a close bond with the child growing within her .  when the baby finally arrives , the timing of birth can seem quite arbitrary .  consider this example  one mother gives birth prematurely to a living baby , who dies after a few days .  another mother carries her baby to full term , but the child dies just before birth .  is the first mother blessed with the hope that her child will be resurrected simply because of the happenstance of a premature birth , whereas the second mother has no such hope .  to summarize , then , the bible clearly teaches that life begins at conception and that jehovah sees the unborn child as a unique and valued individual .  in the light of those scriptural truths , some might see it as inconsistent to argue that there is no hope for a resurrection of an unborn child that dies .  indeed , they might feel that such an argument undermines our scriptural stand against abortion , which is largely based on those very truths .  in the past , this journal has raised some practical questions that seem to cast doubt on the possibility of a resurrection for children who died before birth .  for example , would god implant even a partially developed embryo in the womb of a woman in paradise .  however , further study and prayerful meditation has led the governing body to conclude that such considerations do not really have a bearing on the resurrection hope .  jesus said   all things are possible with god .  jesus '  own experience demonstrated the truth of that statement  his life was transferred from heaven to the womb of a young virgin surely an utter impossibility from a human standpoint .  does all of this mean , then , that the bible teaches that children who perish before birth will be resurrected .  we must emphasize that the bible does not directly answer that question , so there is no basis for humans to be dogmatic on the matter .  this subject may give rise to an almost endless variety of questions .  really , though , it seems best to avoid speculation .  what we know is this  the matter rests with jehovah god , who is abundant in loving - kindness and mercy .  unquestionably , it is his heartfelt desire to undo death by means of the resurrection .  we can be confident that he always does what is right .  he will provide healing for the many wounds inflicted upon us by life in this wicked system of things as he lovingly directs his son to  break up the works of the devil .  footnote  this passage is sometimes translated in a way that implies that only the death of the mother would incur a death penalty .  however , the original hebrew text shows that the law spoke of a fatal injury to either the mother or her unborn child . 
