it is provided as part of a worldwide bible educational work supported by voluntary donations .  to make a donation , please visit donate .  unless otherwise indicated , scripture quotations are from the modern - language new world translation of the holy scriptures . 
we all want to enjoy a happy and fulfilling life .  see how the wisdom needed to attain it is within our reach . 
although i feel sad when i see the badness in the world  wars , poverty , disease , and the mistreatment of children  i am no longer without hope .  rani found real happiness when she learned about the source of true wisdom  our creator , the almighty god .  as you read the following articles , see how his teachings can help you to .  enjoy family happiness   have peaceful relationships with others   find contentment   understand the root causes of suffering and death   have a sure hope for the future   get to know our creator and draw close to him you will also see that our creator ' s wisdom is not just for a select few but is freely available to all who seek it . 
marriage and children are precious gifts from our creator .  he wants us to have a happy family life .  so by means of an ancient sacred book , he has given us guidance that can make our family life better and happier .  consider the following wise counsel .  husbands should love their wives as their own bodies .  a man who loves his wife loves himself , for no man ever hated his own body , but he feeds and cherishes it .  the husband is head of the family .  but a good husband is not harsh or demanding .  he values his wife and takes good care of her material and emotional needs .  he also tries hard to please her , not always insisting on doing what he wants .  he communicates openly and listens when she speaks .  he does not become  bitterly angry  with her or hurt her physically or emotionally .  the wife should have deep respect for her husband .  when a wife respects her husband and supports his decisions , she promotes family peace .  if he makes a mistake , she does not belittle him , but she remains mild and respectful .  when she needs to bring a problem to his attention , she chooses a good time to do so and speaks to him respectfully .  stick to his wife , and they will become one flesh .  when a man and a woman marry , they form a close family bond .  so a married couple should work hard to keep their marriage strong through heartfelt conversations and small acts of kindness .  they should also be faithful to each other by not having sex outside the marriage .  infidelity is cruel .  it destroys trust and can break up the family .  train a child in the way he should go  even when he grows old he will not depart from it .  god has given parents the responsibility to train their children .  that includes teaching them how to behave and setting a good example for them .  when a child misbehaves , a wise parent does not overreact .  he or she is  quick to listen , slow to speak , slow to anger .  if the parent determines that discipline is needed , he or she administers it in love , not in anger .  children , be obedient to your parents .  honor your father and your mother .  children should obey their parents and treat them with deep respect .  when children show honor to their parents , they bring much joy into the home and contribute to family peace and harmony .  adult children honor their parents by ensuring that they are well cared for .  that may include helping them to maintain their home or giving them needed financial assistance .  because of my family background , i used to be very demanding .  but i learned that as head of my family , i should listen to my wife and not be selfish or domineering .  in god ' s eyes , she and i are one flesh , and i should treat her as my own body .  thanks to that wise guidance , i have become a much better husband , and i enjoy a happy family life .  for more practical advice on how you can improve your family life , go to jw .  org and look under bible teachings   marriage   family .  in the same way husbands should love their wives as their own bodies .  as you look out not only for your own interests , but also for the interests of others .  you husbands , keep on loving your wives and do not be bitterly angry  with them .  or  be harsh .  nevertheless , each one of you must love his wife as he does himself  on the other hand , the wife should have deep respect for her husband .  but let it be the secret person of the heart in the incorruptible adornment of the quiet and mild spirit , which is of great value in the eyes of god .  a time to rip apart and a time to sew together  a time to be silent and a time to speak       that is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to  his wife , and they will become one flesh .  or  remain with .  let marriage be honorable among all , and let the marriage bed be without defilement , for god will judge sexually immoral people  and adulterers .  see glossary ,  sexual immorality .  train a boy  in the way he should go  even when he grows old he will not depart from it .  or  child  youth .  or  repeat them to  impress them upon .  know this , my beloved brothers  everyone must be quick to listen , slow to speak , slow to anger ,      children , be obedient to your parents in union with the lord , for this is righteous .  or  widows who are truly in need   that is , with no one to support them . 
our creator tells us how we can enjoy peaceful relationships with others , whether at home , at work , or with friends .  consider some examples of his wise counsel that many people have successfully applied .  forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another .  we all make mistakes .  we might offend others , or they might offend us .  whatever the case , we all need to forgive and to be forgiven .  when we forgive , we stop feeling resentment toward the person who offended us .  we do not  return evil for evil ,  and we do not constantly remind the person of his failings or weaknesses .  but what if we have been deeply hurt and cannot stop thinking about what happened .  then we should respectfully talk to the person about the matter in private .  our goal should be to make peace , not to win the dispute .  with humility consider others superior to you .  when we are humble and respectful , people enjoy being with us .  they know that we will be kind and considerate and that we will not intentionally hurt their feelings .  but if we view ourselves as superior to others or if we always insist on getting our way , we create strife and tension .  people will avoid us , and we will have few friends , if any .  god is not partial , but in every nation the man who fears him and does what is right is acceptable to him .  our creator does not favor people because of their nationality , language , social standing , or skin color .  he made out of one man every nation of men .  so in a sense , all humans are brothers and sisters .  when we treat everyone with dignity and kindness , we make them happy , we ourselves are happier , and we please our creator .  clothe yourselves with .  when we are mild - tempered , we put others at ease .  they feel free to talk to us and even to correct us because they know we will remain calm .  and when someone is angry with us , our mild response may calm the person down .  there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving .  many people today are greedy and think only of themselves .  but true happiness comes to those who are generous .  generous people are happy because they love people more than things .  that same love moves them to be thankful and to show their appreciation when someone is generous toward them .  ask yourself ,  whom do i like to be with  the stingy and thankless or the generous and thankful .   '  the point .  be the kind of person you want others to be .  the scriptures say   have the same attitude toward others as toward yourselves .  do not become wise in your own eyes .   '      this guidance helped me to fight pride and the tendency to look down on people .  i no longer see my ethnic group as better than others , and i do not look down on people of another religion .  also , i am friendlier and more willing to greet others .  for more practical advice on how to improve your relationships , go to jw .  org and look under bible teachings   peace   happiness   relationships .  continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another .  just as jehovah freely forgave you , you must also do the same .  return evil for evil to no one .  take into consideration what is fine from the viewpoint of all men .  if possible , as far as it depends on you , be peaceable with all men .  and he made out of one man every nation of men to dwell on the entire surface of the earth , and he decreed the appointed times and the set limits of where men would dwell ,      accordingly , as god ' s chosen ones , holy and loved , clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion , kindness , humility , mildness , and patience .  a mild  answer turns away rage , but a harsh  word stirs up anger .  or  painful .  i have shown you in all things that by working hard in this way , you must assist those who are weak and must keep in mind the words of the lord jesus , when he himself said   there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving .   '        practice giving , and people will give to you .  they will pour into your laps a fine measure , pressed down , shaken together , and overflowing .  for with the measure that you are measuring out , they will measure out to you in return .  also , let the peace of the christ rule in your hearts , for you were called to that peace in one body .  and show yourselves thankful .  all things , therefore , that you want men to do to you , you also must do to them .  this , in fact , is what the law and the prophets mean .  have the same attitude toward others as toward yourselves  do not set your mind on lofty things ,  but be led along with the lowly things .  do not become wise in your own eyes .  or  do not cultivate lofty ideas  do not be haughty . 
all of us  whether single or married , young or old  want to be happy and content .  our creator wants us to feel that way too , so he has given us excellent advice .  let him do hard work , doing good work with his hands , so that he may have something to share with someone in need .  our creator encourages us to have a positive view of work .  a person who works hard is happy because he is able to provide for himself and his family .  he may even be able to help someone in need .  his employer will value him too .  so a good worker is more likely to keep his job .  the scriptures rightly describe the rewards of hard work as  the gift of god .  we trust we have an honest conscience , as we wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things .  if we are honest , we have self - respect , we enjoy inner peace , and we sleep better at night .  additionally , others will trust and respect us .  dishonest people rob themselves of those good things .  also , their conscience may trouble them , and they may live with the fear of one day getting caught for their dishonesty .  let your way of life be free of the love of money , while you are content with the present things .  we need money for food and other necessities .  however ,  the love of money  is very dangerous .  it can cause a person to use most of his time and energy striving to make more money .  this quest for money can put a strain on his marriage , rob him of time with his children , and even harm his health .  what is more , a person who loves money may be tempted to be dishonest .  a wise man said   a faithful man will receive many blessings , but the one hastening to get rich will not remain innocent .  safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability .  a good education helps us to be responsible adults and parents .  but a fine secular education alone cannot guarantee lasting security or happiness .  to be truly successful in all aspects of life , we need the education god gives us .  the scriptures say of the person who listens to god   everything he does will succeed .  in my community , many people work hard to obtain an extensive education as well as wealth and fame .  yet , they still struggle to find lasting happiness  even after achieving their goals .  i gained a balanced view from the bible .  i learned that money can protect us in some ways , but it cannot buy happiness or true love .  i feel happy and content because the bible helps me make wise decisions about money and work .  for more practical advice from our creator about employment , money matters , and education , go to jw .  org and look under bible teachings   peace   happiness .  let the one who steals steal no more  rather , let him do hard work , doing good work with his hands , so that he may have something to share with someone in need .  also that everyone should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all his hard work .  it is the gift of god .  keep praying for us , for we trust we have an honest  conscience , as we wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things .  let your way of life be free of the love of money , while you are content with the present things .  for he has said   i will never leave you , and i will never abandon you .  but those who are determined to be rich fall into temptation and a snare and many senseless and harmful desires that plunge men into destruction and ruin .  a faithful man will receive many blessings , but the one hastening to get rich will not remain innocent .  my son , do not lose sight of them .  safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability   evidently referring to god ' s qualities mentioned in the previous verses .  happy is the man who does not walk according to the advice of the wicked and does not stand on the path of sinners and does not sit in the seat of scoffers .  and everything he does will succeed .  or  he meditates on his law . 
our creator views us as his children .  so he does not want us to suffer .  yet , there is much suffering around us .  why is this so .  through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin , and so death spread to all men .  god created our original parents , adam and eve , with perfect minds and bodies .  he also gave them a paradise home on earth  called the garden of eden .  he told them that they could eat from all the trees in the garden , except for one .  however , adam and eve chose to eat some of the fruit from that tree , and that was a sin .  after their disobedience , god expelled the couple from the garden and life became hard for them .  in time , they had children , and life was hard for them too .  they all grew old and died .  we get sick , grow old , and die because we come from that original family .  the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one .  that  wicked one  is called satan .  he is an invisible spirit creature who rebelled against god .  later , other spirit creatures joined satan .  they are called demons .  these evil spirits use their power to deceive people and turn them away from the creator .  they influence many people to do bad things .  satan and the demons delight in causing pain and suffering .  whatever a person is sowing , this he will also reap .  in various ways , we all suffer because of inherited sin and satan ' s influence on the world around us .  but sometimes people add to their own suffering .  when they do bad things or make foolish decisions , they often reap bad results .  on the other hand , when people do good things , they reap good results .  for example , a husband and father who is honest , works hard , and loves his family will reap many good things and make his family happy .  but one who gambles , drinks too much , or is lazy may bring himself and his family into poverty .  so we are wise to listen to our creator .  he wants us to reap many good things , including  abundant peace .  in the last days .   , men will be lovers of themselves , lovers of money , .  disobedient to parents , .  without self - control , fierce , without love of goodness .  today , many people behave just as those words foretold .  their behavior adds to the evidence that we are in  the last days  of the present world .  the scriptures also foretold that our time would be marked by wars , food shortages , great earthquakes , and diseases .  these things cause much suffering and death .  because of this , i suffered mentally and emotionally .  i was taught that god is responsible for mankind ' s suffering .  i could not love such a cruel god .  then i examined the bible and learned that the creator cares about us and that a wicked spirit creature called satan is the main cause of human suffering .  i also learned that god will soon destroy satan and undo all the harm he has done .  i have grown to love this wonderful god very much .  and i have found inner peace .  for more helpful information on suffering and how to cope with it , go to jw .  org and look under bible teachings   bible questions answered   suffering .  that is why , just as through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin , and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned .  jehovah god took the man and settled him in the garden of e den to cultivate it and to take care of it .  now the serpent was the most cautious  of all the wild animals of the field that jehovah god had made .  so it said to the woman   did god really say that you must not eat from every tree of the garden .  so she began taking of its fruit and eating it .  afterward , she also gave some to her husband when he was with her , and he began eating it .  so they sewed fig leaves together and made loin coverings for themselves .  have you eaten from the tree from which i commanded you not to eat .  the woman replied   the serpent deceived me , so i ate .  on your belly you will go , and you will eat dust all the days of your life .  he will crush  your head , and you will strike  him in the heel .  in pain you will eat its produce all the days of your life .  for dust you are and to dust you will return .  or  shrewdest  craftiest .  or  hostility .  or  bruise  strike .  or  bruise  crush .  meaning  earthling man  mankind  humankind .  with that jehovah god expelled him from the garden of e den to cultivate the ground from which he had been taken .  we know that we originate with god , but the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one .  you are from your father the devil , and you wish to do the desires of your father .  that one was a murderer when he began , and he did not stand fast in the truth , because truth is not in him .  when he speaks the lie , he speaks according to his own disposition , because he is a liar and the father of the lie .  so down the great dragon was hurled , the original serpent , the one called devil and satan , who is misleading the entire inhabited earth  he was hurled down to the earth , and his angels were hurled down with him .  but they mingled with the nations and adopted  their ways .  or  learned .  however , the inspired word  clearly says that in later times some will fall away from the faith , paying attention to misleading inspired statements  and teachings of demons ,  lit .   ,  the spirit .   ,  misleading spirits .  do not be misled  god is not one to be mocked .  for whatever a person is sowing , this he will also reap       abundant peace belongs to those who love your law  nothing can make them stumble .  or  for them there is no stumbling block .  but know this , that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here .  while he was sitting on the mount of olives , the disciples approached him privately , saying   tell us , when will these things be , and what will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things .  for nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom , and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another .  then he said to them   nation will rise against nation , and kingdom against kingdom . 
god has promised exciting changes for the near future .  he is going to end suffering and make life on earth a delight for the human family .  why can we believe this promise .  because  god is not a mere man who tells lies .  consider some of the good things that our creator will do .  when the wicked sprout like weeds and all the wrongdoers flourish , it is that they may be annihilated forever .  as we learned in the preceding article , evil keeps increasing .  this should not surprise us .  the last days of what .  of the present world of ungodly people .  soon , god will bring an end to those who refuse to change their bad ways .  then , only good people  those who obey god  will be left .  the righteous will possess the earth , and they will live forever on it .  the god who gives peace will crush satan .  with all the wicked gone , including satan and the demons , peace will at last prevail earth wide .  our creator promises   no one will make  you  afraid .  the tent of god is with mankind .  and he will wipe out every tear from their eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore .  suffering and sickness will end because god will undo all the harm caused by satan , adam , eve , and our own imperfections .  as a result , even  death will be no more .  humans who love and obey the creator will live forever .  but where will they live .  the wilderness and the parched land will exult , and the desert plain will be joyful and blossom as the saffron .  when god brings an end to the wicked , the earth will thrive .  it will abound with delightful parks and gardens , and it will produce plenty of food .  the oceans , lakes , and rivers will be clean and teem with life .  even the word  pollution  may disappear from our vocabulary .  people will live in homes they built and own .  and never again will anyone be homeless , hungry , or poor .  there is going to be a resurrection .  would you like to see your dead loved ones again .  the almighty god will bring them back to life  or resurrect them  in paradise on earth .  you will recognize them , and they will recognize you .  imagine your joy and theirs .  why can we be sure of this hope .  because the bible gives us examples of adults and children who were brought back to life and reunited with their families .  moreover , jesus often resurrected the dead in front of many witnesses .  i remember the first time i heard about a paradise earth free from suffering , sickness , and death .  in my heart i laughed , thinking that this can ' t be true .  but my study of the bible gave me reasons to trust this unique book and its promises .  i am convinced that the bible is from god .  in the past , i often had a worried , sad expression on my face .  now i am truly happy .  even my family and friends can see the difference in me .  to learn more about the creator ' s purpose for humans to live forever on a paradise earth , go to jw .  org and look under bible teachings   bible questions answered   life   death .  but the meek will possess the earth , and they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace .  god is not a mere man who tells lies , nor a son of man who changes his mind .  when he says something , will he not do it .  when he speaks , will he not carry it out .  or  who feels regret .  when the wicked sprout like weeds  and all the wrongdoers flourish , it is that they may be annihilated forever .  but know this , that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here .  the righteous will possess the earth , and they will live forever on it .  for his part , the god who gives peace will crush satan under your feet shortly .  may the undeserved kindness of our lord jesus be with you .  they will sit ,  each one under his vine and under his fig tree , and no one will make them afraid , for the mouth of jehovah of armies has spoken .  with that i heard a loud voice from the throne say   look .  the tent of god is with mankind , and he will reside with them , and they will be his people .  and god himself will be with them .  the former things have passed away .  the wilderness and the parched land will exult , and the desert plain will be joyful and blossom as the saffron .  there will be an abundance of grain on the earth  on the top of the mountains it will overflow .  his fruit will flourish as in leb a non , and in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth .  they will build houses and live in them , and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage .  for the days of my people will be like the days of a tree , and the work of their hands my chosen ones will enjoy to the full .  and i have hope toward god , which hope these men also look forward to , that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous .  while he was yet speaking , a representative of the presiding officer of the synagogue came , saying   your daughter has died  do not bother the teacher any longer .  so he said   stop weeping , for she did not die but is sleeping .  or  wake up .  after he said these things , he added   laz a rus our friend has fallen asleep , but i am traveling there to awaken him .  but they imagined he was speaking about taking rest in sleep .  then jesus , after groaning again within himself , came to the tomb .  it was , in fact , a cave , and a stone was lying against it .  martha , the sister of the deceased , said to him   lord , by now he must smell , for it has been four days .  then jesus raised his eyes heavenward and said   father , i thank you that you have heard me .  jesus said to them   free him and let him go . 
our creator is not merely a force .  he has endearing qualities .  and he wants us to learn about him and draw close to him .  that is why he has revealed much about himself .  may people know that you , whose name is jehovah , you alone are the most high over all the earth .  the bible teaches that jehovah is the one true god .  he is the creator of the universe and of all life .  he alone deserves our worship .  god is love .  by means of the bible and the natural world around us , jehovah has revealed many of his qualities .  love is his foremost quality .  it defines who he is .  the more we learn about jehovah , the more we love him .  you are a god ready to forgive .  jehovah knows that we are imperfect .  so he is  ready to forgive  us .  when we tell him we are sorry and try hard to stop doing bad things , he will forgive us and not hold our past sins against us .  jehovah is near to all those calling on him .  he hears their cry for help .  jehovah requires no special rituals or religious objects in his worship .  he listens to our prayers just as loving parents listen to their dear children .  this means everlasting life , their coming to know you , the only true god , and the one whom you sent , jesus christ .  draw close to god , and he will draw close to you .  cleanse your hands , you sinners , and purify your hearts , you indecisive ones .  may people know that you , whose name is jehovah , you alone are the most high over all the earth .  you are worthy , jehovah  our god , to receive the glory and the honor and the power , because you created all things , and because of your will they came into existence and were created .  whoever does not love has not come to know god , because god is love .  they refused to listen , and they did not remember your extraordinary acts that you performed among them , but they became stubborn  and appointed a head to return to their slavery in egypt .  but you are a god ready to forgive ,  compassionate  and merciful , slow to anger and abundant in loyal love ,  and you did not abandon them .   ,  hardened their neck .  or  a god of acts of forgiveness .  or  gracious .  or  loving - kindness .  as far off as the sunrise is from the sunset , so far off from us he has put our transgressions .  jehovah is near to all those calling on him , to all who call on him in truth .  or  in sincerity . 
all scripture is inspired of god .  in this verse ,  inspired  means that almighty god put his thoughts into the minds of the bible writers .  i , jehovah , am .  teaching you to benefit yourself , the one guiding you in the way you should walk .  if only you would pay attention to my commandments .  then your peace would become just like a river and your righteousness like the waves of the sea .  consider those words as a personal invitation from god .  he wants you to have inner peace and lasting happiness , and he can help you to find them .  in all the nations , the good news has to be preached .  the  good news  includes jehovah ' s promises to end suffering , to make the earth a paradise , and to bring our dead loved ones back to life .  jehovah ' s witnesses are preaching that bible - based message worldwide .  from a very young age , i was confused about who the creator is .  i wondered ,  how could each nation rightly have its own god or creator .   '  he also has a personal name  jehovah  and he wants us to be his friends .  all scripture is inspired of god and beneficial for teaching , for reproving , for setting things straight ,  for disciplining in righteousness ,  or  correcting .  this is what jehovah says , your repurchaser , the holy one of israel   i , jehovah , am your god , the one teaching you to benefit yourself ,  the one guiding you in the way you should walk .  then your peace would become just like a river and your righteousness like the waves of the sea .  or  for your own good .  also , in all the nations , the good news has to be preached first .  or is he the god of the jews only .  is he not also the god of people of the nations .  yes , also of people of the nations . 
a wise man wrote   wisdom is the most important thing , so acquire wisdom , and with all you acquire , acquire understanding .  our creator helps us to develop wisdom and understanding so that we can make good decisions and have a happy life .  if you would like to learn more about the practical wisdom found in the bible , go to jw .  there you will find .  the bible  videos  animations  interviews  articles they are available free of charge , and they help people of all ages and from all walks of life .  wisdom is the most important  thing , so acquire wisdom , and with all you acquire , acquire understanding .  or  the prime . 
